COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
199
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Accounting 
ACCT 220 Principles of Accounting I (3)
An introduction to the basic theory and techniques of contem-
porary financial accounting. The objective is to identify the 
fundamental principles of accounting, identify and analyze 
business transactions, prepare financial statements, and com-
municate this information to users with different needs. Topics 
include the accounting cycle, transactions, and the preparation 
of financial statements for single-owner business organizations 
that operate as service companies or merchandisers. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: ACCT 
220 or BMGT 220.
ACCT 221 Principles of Accounting II (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 220. Further study of contemporary account-
ing practices, with an emphasis on data analysis for financial 
and managerial accounting. The goal is to analyze business 
transactions, define the characteristics of business entities, 
explain the interdependency of financial statements, employ 
managerial accounting techniques, and communicate this infor-
mation to users with unique needs. Financial accounting topics 
include liabilities, equities, investments, and business entities. 
Managerial accounting topics include job order and process 
costing, cost-volume-profit analysis, and budgets. Students  
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: ACCT 
221 or BMGT 221.
ACCT 301 Accounting for Nonaccounting Managers (3)
(May not be applied toward a major in accounting.) A survey of 
accounting principles relevant to making business decisions 
based on financial information. The aim is to apply critical- 
thinking skills and ethical principles to accounting issues.  
Topics include internal controls, financial reporting, financial 
statements analysis, managerial accounting, and budgeting  
elements. Students may receive credit for only one of the  
following courses: ACCT 301, MGMT 301, or MGST 301.
ACCT 310 Intermediate Accounting I (3)
(Students should be cautious about enrolling in ACCT 310 or 
ACCT 311. These are professional courses requiring intensive 
study and analysis and are not to be undertaken casually. Stu-
dents who have not taken ACCT 221 within the last two years 
may have difficulty.) Prerequisite: ACCT 221. A comprehensive 
analysis of financial accounting topics related to preparing finan-
cial statements for external reporting. The objective is to analyze 
complex business transactions and their impact on financial 
statements. Focus is on researching and analyzing emerging 
issues in accounting, business transactions, and financing. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
ACCT 310 or BMGT 310.
ACCT 311 Intermediate Accounting II (3)
(A continuation of ACCT 310. Students should be cautious about 
enrolling in ACCT 310 or ACCT 311. These are professional 
courses requiring intensive study and analysis and are not to 
be undertaken casually. Students who have not taken ACCT 310 
within the last two years may have difficulty.) Prerequisite: ACCT 
310. A comprehensive analysis of financial accounting top-
ics, including preparation of financial statements and external 
reports. The aim is to analyze complex business transactions 
and their impact on financial statements. Focus is on research-
ing and analyzing emerging issues in accounting, business 
transactions, and financing. Students may receive credit for  
only one of the following courses: ACCT 311 or BMGT 311.
ACCT 320 Fraud Detection and Deterrence (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 220 or ACCT 301. A study of the principles 
behind and standards for examining, identifying, detecting, 
and deterring fraud. The objective is to differentiate types of 
fraud, assess organizational characteristics conducive to fraud, 
and develop a plan to detect and deter fraud. Topics include 
the fraud triangle, cash larceny, check tampering, skimming, 
register disbursement schemes, cash receipts schemes, billing 
schemes, payroll and expense reimbursement issues, asset 
misappropriations, corruption, accounting principles and fraud, 
fraudulent financial statements, whistleblowing, interviewing 
witnesses, and writing reports. Focus is on creating and com-
municating meaningful data visualizations for stakeholders.
ACCT 321 Cost Accounting Data Analytics (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 221. A study of basic cost accounting con-
cepts. The goal is to apply basic cost accounting concepts,  
use technology to prepare financial deliverables, evaluate  
business and financial data, and communicate financial infor-
mation. Topics include ethics, corporate social responsibility, 
and the evaluation of business and financial data to make  
profit-maximizing decisions. Discussion also covers the role of  
accountants in decision-making; cost behavior; cost planning and 
control; and costing methods, such as standard costing, budget-
ing, and inventory valuation. Focus is on using data analytics and 
creating and communicating meaningful data visualizations  
for decision-making. 
ACCT 323 Federal Income Tax I (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 220 or FINC 321. A study of data and 
processes related to the preparation of federal income tax for 
individuals and other entities. The objective is to explain the leg-
islative process, conduct tax research, evaluate tax implications, 
and complete an individual tax return. Topics include the legisla-
tive process, tax policy, research, and the evaluation of transac-
tions and decisions for planning and compliance. Emphasis is 
on ethics and professional responsibilities.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
200
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ACCT 326 Accounting Information Systems (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 221. An introduction to accounting informa-
tion systems (AIS) concepts. The objective is to evaluate how 
AIS tools are used to record, process, and analyze financial data; 
determine how best to integrate AIS tools and processes in a 
given organization; review and recommend controls to secure AIS  
applications and processes; and evaluate how technology can be 
used in AIS applications. Topics include transactional processing 
concepts and core AIS transactional cycles, basic control frame-
works used to secure AIS applications and processes, strategies 
for implementing or upgrading AIS applications, information 
technology and accounting standards, and e-commerce and 
e-business. Students may receive credit for only one of the  
following courses: ACCT 326, BMGT 320, or BMGT 326.
ACCT 350 Federal Financial Management (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 220 or ACCT 301. Analysis and discussion 
of issues relating to federal financial management. The objec-
tive is to apply knowledge of the federal process to accounting 
practice, administer federal grants and contracts, and research 
federal laws and regulations. Topics include the CFO Act, the 
federal budget, federal contracts and grants, data visualization 
presentations, and federal financial and information systems. 
Discussion also covers detection and deterrence of fraud, 
waste, and abuse.
ACCT 410 Accounting for Government  
and Not-for-Profit Organizations (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 310. An introduction to the theory and 
practice of accounting as applied to governmental entities and 
not-for-profit organizations. The objective is to evaluate transac-
tions, prepare and analyze financial statements, write financial 
briefings, prepare data visualization presentations, and apply 
accounting rules and procedures. Topics include the evaluation 
and preparation of reports required for governmental and not-
for-profit entities. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: ACCT 410 or BMGT 410.
ACCT 411 Ethics and Professionalism in Accounting (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 311. An examination of ethical behavior in 
organizations and for the accounting and auditing professions. 
The goal is to identify ethical dilemmas, research regulations, 
and apply problem-solving methodology to resolve unethical 
situations. Discussion covers the AICPA Code of Professional 
Conduct and the ethical codes and requirements of other 
standard-setting organizations. Corporate governance, sustain-
ability, and legal and regulatory obligations are explored within 
an ethical framework, including philosophical models and 
ethical theories, as well as within environmental, social, and 
governance (ESG) criteria.
ACCT 417 Federal Income Tax II (3)
(Strongly recommended for students seeking careers as CPAs.) 
Prerequisites: ACCT 311 and ACCT 323. A continuing study 
of federal income taxation as applied to different business 
entities, including corporations, flow-through entities, estates, 
and trusts. The aim is to analyze tax planning and compli-
ance issues; conduct tax research; and analyze, evaluate, and 
communicate tax implications and data. Discussion covers tax 
research, planning, procedure, compliance, ethics, and profes-
sional responsibility. Topics also include the tax implications of 
various entities’ financial and business decisions and transac-
tions. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ACCT 417 or BMGT 417.
ACCT 422 Auditing Theory and Practice (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 311. Recommended: ACCT 326. A study of 
the auditing profession, audit process, and other assurance and 
non-assurance services related to the CPA profession. The objec-
tive is to design an audit plan, apply audit procedures, evaluate 
audit findings, and assess the impact of standards and emerging 
issues. Topics include generally accepted auditing standards, 
tests of controls and substantive tests, statistical sampling, 
data analytics, report forms, and opinions. Various techniques 
are used to study auditing concepts and practices; these may 
include the use of problem sets, case studies, computer applica-
tions, and other materials. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: ACCT 422 or BMGT 422.
ACCT 424 Advanced Accounting (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 311. A study of advanced accounting theory, 
applied to specialized topics and contemporary problems. The 
aim is to prepare, present, and explain financial statements in 
five sectors—consolidated, international, partnership, not-for-
profit, and state and local governments—and analyze a firm’s 
dissolution or reorganization. Emphasis is on consolidated 
statements and partnership accounting. Various techniques are 
used to study accounting theory and practice; these may include 
the use of data analytics, problem sets, case studies, computer 
applications, and other materials. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: ACCT 424 or BMGT 424.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
201
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ACCT 425 International Accounting (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 311. A study of accounting in a multinational 
context covering historical developments and international 
financial reporting standards. The objective is to recognize the 
influence of politics and culture on the development of account-
ing systems, prepare financial statements according to inter- 
national financial reporting standards, and analyze the financial 
statements of a multinational enterprise. Strategies to manage 
and hedge against foreign currency exposure are developed. 
Topics include sustainability, foreign exchange and taxation, 
intercompany transfer pricing, data analytics, and emerging 
issues in international accounting. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: ACCT 425 or ACCT 498A.
ACCT 436 Internal Auditing (3)
(Designed to align with the standards of the Institute of Internal 
Auditors and help prepare for the Certified Internal Auditor exam-
ination.) Prerequisite: ACCT 311. An exploration of the consulta-
tive role in the management of risk. The aim is to identify the 
standards that apply to internal auditors, audit processes, and 
procedures and to assess internal control deficiencies. Topics 
include internal auditing standards, scope, responsibilities, eth-
ics, controls, techniques, and reporting practices. Data analytics 
and practice involve the use of software such as Excel, Power BI, 
Tableau, ACL, and IDEA. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: ACCT 436, ACCT 498E, or BMGT 498E.
ACCT 438 Fraud and Forensic Accounting (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 311. An analysis and discussion of issues 
relating to fraud and forensic accounting. The objective is to 
identify the resources for detecting fraud, evaluate the condi-
tions that encourage fraud, and design effective fraud detection 
and deterrence plans. Discussion covers the principles and 
standards for proactive and reactive investigation, as well as 
detection and control of fraud. Focus is on data analytics and 
creating and communicating meaningful data visualizations  
for stakeholders from the perspective of public, internal, and 
private accountants.
ACCT 440 Forensic and Investigative Accounting (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 320 or ACCT 438. An analysis and discus-
sion of issues relating to forensic and investigative account-
ing. The goal is to research and describe the use of forensic 
accounting evidence, identify the role of the forensic accoun-
tant, apply investigative and forensic accounting practices, and 
present forensic accounting evidence as an expert witness. 
Forensic and investigative methods, including the use of data 
analytics, auditing, and technology are demonstrated. Topics 
include criminal and civil litigation support, rules of evidence, 
and accreditation of expert witnesses.
ACCT 452 Federal Auditing (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 221. An overview of the federal auditing life 
cycle. The objective is to plan, manage, and execute a federal 
audit; identify and evaluate the program and financial risks; 
and identify and recommend enhancements to operations 
and technology. Topics include federal audits; data visualiza-
tion, communicating audit findings to stakeholders, providing 
advisory support, and evaluating program and financial risks; 
managing technology and increasing economy and efficiency; 
and minimizing fraud, waste, and abuse. Discussions also cover 
the auditing of grants and contracts.
ACCT 486A Workplace Learning in Accounting (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
ACCT 486B Workplace Learning in Accounting (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
African American Studies 
AASP 201 Introduction to African American Studies (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in behavioral and 
social sciences.) An interdisciplinary study of significant aspects 
of African American history and culture, emphasizing the devel-
opment of African American communities from the Middle Pas-
sage to the present. The objective is to conduct research, apply 
critical-thinking skills, and articulate diverse historical perspec-
tives in the context of African American history and culture. Top-
ics include definitions of African American identity, influences, 
and achievements within American culture, as well as issues 
confronting African Americans. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: AASP 100 or AASP 201.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
202
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Anthropology 
ANTH 101 Introduction to Biological Anthropology (3)
A survey of general patterns in the development of human 
culture, addressing the biological and morphological aspects 
of humans viewed in their cultural setting. The aim is to apply 
anthropological knowledge to understanding human origins and 
how human populations adapt to the environment. Discussion 
examines human evolution and adaptation, including biocultural 
patterns in humans and other primates. Students who complete 
both ANTH 101 and ANTH 102 may not receive credit for ANTH 
340, BEHS 340, or BEHS 341.
ANTH 102 Introduction to Cultural Anthropology (3)
A survey of social and cultural principles inherent in ethno-
graphic descriptions. The objective is to apply anthropological 
knowledge of human behavior to everyday situations and prob-
lems. Students who complete both ANTH 101 and ANTH 102 
may not receive credit for ANTH 340, BEHS 340, or BEHS 341.
ANTH 298 Special Topics in Anthropology (1–3)
A presentation of anthropological perspectives on selected top-
ics of broad general interest. May be repeated to a maximum of 
6 credits when topics differ.
ANTH 345 World Prehistory and Archaeology (3)
An intermediate-level exploration of world prehistory and 
archaeology. The goal is to analyze the cultural, technological, 
and subsistence patterns of prehistoric humans and relate 
these patterns to contemporary human societies and popula-
tions. Discussion covers archaeological theories and methods; 
subsistence strategies; and the applications of archaeological 
knowledge to modern community, regional, and global issues.
ANTH 346 Anthropology of Language  
and Communication (3)
An intermediate-level anthropological study of language, com-
munication, and culture. The aim is to understand language in 
a cultural context; assess how the concepts, approaches, and 
methods of linguistic anthropology explain communication in 
changing cultural environments; and recognize how language 
both shapes and is shaped by culture. Topics include the origin 
of human language, linguistic diversity, structural elements 
of verbal and nonverbal language, language as social action, 
research in anthropological linguistics, language and power 
hierarchies, gendered communications, and linguistic diversity 
in the contemporary world.
ANTH 350 Health, Illness, and Healing (3)
Recommended: ANTH 102. An overview of health, illness, and 
healing from a cross-cultural perspective. The objective is to 
apply the perspectives of medical anthropology to promote indi-
vidual and public health in local, national, and global contexts. 
Topics include cultural and social influences on health and heal-
ing, the experience and meaning of illness, and current issues in 
public and global health.
ANTH 351 Anthropology in Forensic Investigations (3)
An overview of forensic anthropology, an applied field of anthro-
pology that seeks to recover, identify, and evaluate human skel-
etal remains within a medicolegal context. The aim is to explore 
the processes and methods used by forensic anthropologists to 
identify a cause and manner of death and determine an approxi-
mate postmortem interval. Topics include the forensic context, 
the human skeletal system, methods of identification, cause 
and manner of death, assessment of trauma, and analysis of 
evidence to draw conclusions about a case.
ANTH 398 Intermediate Special Topics  
in Anthropology (1–3)
A presentation of anthropological perspectives on selected top-
ics of broad general interest. May be repeated to a maximum of 
6 credits when topics differ.
ANTH 417 Peoples and Cultures of East Asia (3)
An advanced anthropological study of the peoples and cultures 
of East Asia, focusing on China, Japan, and Korea. The aim is 
to apply anthropological theories and methods to the inter-
pretation of contemporary East Asian cultures, relate family 
structure to individual choices and social interactions in East 
Asian cultures, and analyze how ethnic and national identities 
and regional differences affect regional and global interactions. 
Topics include urbanization, social values, social change, and 
the role of East Asia in the modern world.
Applied Technology 
APTC 495 Applied Technology Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: 27 credits in major coursework. A project-based 
application of computing knowledge and skills to solve prob-
lems. Focus is on researching, planning, and implementing  
a computing-based solution to an approved business and  
disciplinary-based problem outside the primary area of tech- 
nology or computing focus. Assignments include working in 
teams through the planning, analysis, design, implementa-
tion, testing, and documentation phases. A presentation of the 
applied solutions constitutes a final learning demonstration.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
203
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Arabic 
ARAB 111 Elementary Arabic I (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of Ara-
bic; assumes no prior knowledge of Arabic. Students with prior 
experience with the Arabic language should take a placement 
test to assess appropriate level.) An introduction to spoken 
and written modern standard Arabic. The objective is to com-
municate in Arabic in some concrete, real-life situations, using 
culturally appropriate language and etiquette. Ample practice 
in Arabic pronunciation and the structures needed for everyday 
communication are provided.
ARAB 112 Elementary Arabic II (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Arabic; assumes no prior knowledge of Arabic. Students with 
prior experience with the Arabic language should take a place-
ment test to assess appropriate level.) Prerequisite: ARAB 111 
or appropriate score on a placement test. An introduction to 
spoken and written modern standard Arabic. The objective is 
to communicate in Arabic in some concrete, real-life situations, 
using culturally appropriate language and etiquette. Ample 
practice in Arabic pronunciation and the structures needed for 
everyday communication are provided.
ARAB 114 Elementary Arabic III (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional  
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers  
of Arabic.) Prerequisite: ARAB 112 or appropriate score on a 
placement test. Further development of skills in elementary 
spoken and written modern standard Arabic. The aim is to com-
municate in Arabic in a variety of real-life situations, using cul-
turally appropriate language. Practice is provided in improving 
pronunciation and developing the oral and written skills used  
in everyday communication.
ARAB 115 Elementary Arabic IV (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Arabic.) Prerequisite: ARAB 114 or appropriate score on a place-
ment test. Further development of skills in elementary spoken 
and written modern standard Arabic. The objective is to interact 
effectively with native Arabic speakers in a variety of real-life 
situations, using culturally appropriate language. Practice in 
fine-tuning pronunciation and applying language skills to a 
range of contexts is provided.
ARAB 333 Middle Eastern Cultures (3)
(Conducted in English.) A project-driven and discussion-based 
study of Middle Eastern cultures. The aim is to demonstrate 
cultural competence by explaining and analyzing Middle East-
ern cultures through a variety of perspectives. Topics include 
religion, cultural practices, history, geography, and societies of 
the Middle East. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: ARAB 333 or ARAB 334.
Art 
ARTT 110 Introduction to Drawing (3)
A hands-on introduction to various drawing media and related 
techniques. The objective is to translate the three-dimensional 
world into two dimensions, communicate through a visual 
medium, and critique visual works of art. Projects are based  
on nature and still life.
ARTT 120 Design I: Arrangement and Color (3)
Prerequisite: GRCO 100. A project-driven study of the design ele-
ments of a composition as they relate to its overall expression. 
The aim is to apply elements and principles of design, including 
color theory, to create a variety of compositions that effectively 
communicate ideas and emotions.
ARTT 152 Basics of Photography (3)
(Access to a digital camera with manual settings required.) An 
introduction to basic photographic procedures with an empha-
sis on composing, taking, and editing photographs. Discussion 
covers the historical development of photography. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses:  
ARTT 152 or PHOT 198.
ARTT 210 Intermediate Drawing (3)
Prerequisite: ARTT 110. A continuing examination of materials 
and techniques of drawing. The objective is to apply drawing 
techniques and visual principles to various subjects, communi-
cate through drawing, and critique works of art. More advanced 
media, compositions, techniques, and subjects are explored. 
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ARTS 210 or ARTT 210.
ARTT 320 Painting (3)
Prerequisite: ARTT 110. Practice in the basic tools and vocabu-
lary of painting. The goal is to apply an understanding of com-
positional strategies, visual principles, and basic materials  
and techniques to produce paintings using oil/watercolor/
acrylic paints.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
204
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ARTT 428 Advanced Painting (3)
Prerequisite: ARTT 320. Creation of original compositions based 
on the figure, nature, and still life, as well as expressive painting. 
The goal is to paint in a variety of styles and techniques, work 
with more complex forms (including drapery, transparency, and 
reflections), and work in landscape and/or figure in space paint-
ing. Emphasis is on the development of personal directions. 
May be repeated to a maximum of 12 credits.
Art History 
ARTH 204 Film and American Culture Studies (3)
An introductory study of the relationship between film and 
American culture. The objective is to improve one’s ability 
to understand a film’s message and to expand one’s cultural 
awareness. Discussion covers the way one of our most popular 
media portrays American culture and influences our interpreta-
tion of cultural issues. Various films, filmmaking issues, and 
representative filmmakers’ work are examined. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: ARTH 204, 
AMST 204, or HUMN 204.
ARTH 334 Understanding Movies (3)
(Formerly HUMN 334.) An analysis of one of the most important 
means of artistic expression of the 20th century. The goal is to 
acquire a deeper understanding of the aesthetic qualities of film 
by considering the stylistic elements of film as it has evolved 
throughout the century and weighing the special relationship 
between cinema and literature. Students may receive credit  
for only one of the following courses: ARTH 334, HUMN 334,  
or HUMN 498D.
ARTH 372 History of Western Art I (3)
(Formerly ARTH 370.) A survey of the development of the 
Western tradition of visual art in its various forms that exam-
ines and compares the expression of cultural and aesthetic 
values in different parts of the Western world from prehistory 
through the Middle Ages. The objective is to apply principles of 
visual literacy; describe, analyze, and contextualize content and 
elements of art; and differentiate historic periods and styles of 
art. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ARTH 370 or ARTH 372.
ARTH 373 History of Western Art II (3)
(Formerly ARTH 371.) A survey of the development of visual 
art of the Western world in its various forms that examines and 
compares the expression of cultural and aesthetic values in 
Europe and the United States from 1300 to the present day. The 
aim is to apply principles of visual literacy; describe, analyze, 
and contextualize content and elements of art; and differentiate 
historic periods and styles of art. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: ARTH 371 or ARTH 373.
ARTH 375 History of Graphic Art (3)
Recommended: ARTH 204. A survey of the development of 
graphic design with an emphasis on the historical, technologi-
cal, and sociological influences on the production of typography 
and the aesthetics of visual media. The aim is to recognize the 
philosophy of graphic arts, identify various movements within 
the field, and analyze the impact of graphic arts on society.  
Topics include major works and artists and cultural, social,  
and religious movements and their impact on graphic arts.
ARTH 478 History of Women in the Visual Arts (3)
A survey of the work, roles, and representations of women in 
the visual arts, from the 16th century to the present. The aim 
is to evaluate the role of women artists and assess the impact 
of gender on visual arts as a way to understand the complexity 
and diversity of human experience and culture. Emphasis is on 
women working in the tradition of Western art in painting, sculp-
ture, the decorative arts, performance art, photography, and other 
media and on how gender affected their art and their careers.
Asian Studies 
ASTD 135 Introduction to Japanese Language  
and Culture (3)
(Formerly JAPN 105. Not open to students with substantial 
prior experience with Japanese language or culture; assumes 
no prior knowledge of Japanese. Students with prior experience 
with the Japanese language should take a placement test to 
assess appropriate level.) A hands-on, project-based introduc-
tion to Japanese language and culture. The goal is to develop 
cultural competency and familiarity with the history, geography, 
and culture of Japan and to use basic language skills to func-
tion effectively and appropriately in everyday life in Japan. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
ASTD 135 or JAPN 105.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
205
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ASTD 155 Introduction to Korean Language  
and Culture (3)
(Not open to students with substantial prior experience with 
Korean language or culture; assumes no prior knowledge 
of Korean. Students with prior experience with the Korean 
language should take a placement test to assess appropriate 
level.) A hands-on, project-based introduction to Korean lan-
guage and culture. The goal is to develop cultural competence 
in personal interactions; demonstrate knowledge of the history, 
geography, and culture of Korea; and use basic language skills 
to function effectively and appropriately in everyday activities in 
Korea. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ASTD 155 or KORN 105.
ASTD 284 Foundations of East Asian Civilization (3)
(Formerly HIST 284.) An interdisciplinary survey of the foun-
dations of East Asian civilization from its beginnings to the  
17th century. The goal is to analyze philosophical, religious, 
artistic, economic, and political aspects of the region’s historical 
experience. Focus is on China, Korea, and Japan. Topics include 
East Asian belief systems (including Confucianism and Bud-
dhism), the dynastic cycle, relations between steppe and agrar-
ian societies, warrior and scholar-gentry cultures, technological 
change and economic development, and the role of class and 
gender in early East Asian society. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: ASTD 150, ASTD 284,  
or HIST 284.
ASTD 285 Introduction to Modern East Asia (3)
(Formerly HIST 285.) An interdisciplinary survey of East Asia 
from the late 17th century—beginning with Ming-Qing China, 
Tokugawa Japan, and Choson Korea—to the present. The objec-
tive is to trace how transformations on global, regional, and 
local levels led to the development of the modern nation-states 
of East Asia and to examine how those developments affected 
the culture of the areas. Topics include the rise of imperial-
ism and colonialism; cross-cultural interactions; and issues of 
gender, class, and ethnicity in East Asian culture. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: ASTD 160, 
ASTD 285, or HIST 285.
ASTD 302 The Two Koreas: Problems and Prospects (3)
Prerequisite: Any writing course. Recommended: ASTD 284 
or ASTD 285. A thematic study of the two Koreas from histori-
cal, social, and foreign policy perspectives. The objective is to 
examine scholarly viewpoints on key issues of Korean history 
and division; articulate key factors that shape U.S. and regional 
policy toward North Korea; distinguish between different 
sources of information on the two Koreas; and interpret regional 
developments based on knowledge of Korean issues. Topics 
include the “hermit kingdom” myth; liberation, division, and war; 
the economic “miracle”; North Korean leadership; South and 
North Korean foreign relations; North Korea as a nuclear threat; 
and prospects for a unified Korea. Focus is on developing a 
stronger understanding of the two Koreas for practical and pro-
fessional application. Assignments require research, analysis, 
and a written policy or strategy recommendation.
ASTD 370 Interpreting Contemporary China (3)
Prerequisite: Any WRTG course. Recommended: ASTD 285. A 
thematic study of contemporary China from political, economic, 
social, and foreign policy perspectives. The objective is to iden-
tify decision-making authorities, interpret major influences on 
the Chinese economy, appraise the impact of grassroots social 
movements, and distinguish factors that drive China’s foreign 
policy. Focus is on developing engagement strategies for vari-
ous professional applications. Assignments require research, 
analysis, and a written policy or strategy recommendation (e.g., 
a policy paper or business strategy plan).
ASTD 398 Advanced Special Topics in Asian Studies (3)
An investigation of a special topic, problem, or issue of particu-
lar relevance to countries or peoples of the Pacific Rim or Indian 
Ocean. Typical investigations include historical or contemporary 
subjects focusing on cultural, economic, military, or political 
issues. Assignments include advanced reading and research.
ASTD 485 East Asian Studies Capstone
Prerequisite: Completion of at least 24 credits in the major, 
including ASTD 284 and ASTD 285. A project-based inter-
disciplinary study of East Asia that integrates knowledge gained 
through previous coursework and experience and builds on that 
conceptual foundation through integrative analysis, practical 
application, and critical thinking. Discussion covers emerging 
issues and current scholarship in East Asian studies.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
206
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Astronomy 
ASTR 100 Introduction to Astronomy (3)
Prerequisite: MATH 105, STAT 200, or a higher MATH or STAT 
course. An examination of the major areas of astronomy. Top-
ics include the solar system, stars and stellar evolution, and 
galaxies. Current topics in astronomy are also discussed. The 
objective is to use scientific and quantitative reasoning to make 
informed decisions about topics related to space science. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
ASTR 100, ASTR 101, ASTR 120, or GNSC 125.
Behavioral and  
Social Sciences 
BEHS 103 Technology in Contemporary Society (3)
An interdisciplinary introduction to the role of technology in con-
temporary society. The aim is to apply principles and concepts 
from a variety of social science disciplines (e.g., anthropology, 
sociology, psychology, and gerontology) to explore the influence 
of technology on society and the effect of technological change 
on our social lives, including our interpersonal relationships, 
work, culture, and society. Topics include the way technology 
changes relationships, the cumulative advantages and disad-
vantages associated with technology, digital natives versus 
digital immigrants, the pace of technological change, changes 
to the nature of how people learn and think, and the meaning of 
technology in society.
BEHS 210 Introduction to Social Sciences (3)
Recommended: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An interdisciplinary 
introduction to the study of society. The objective is to use the 
combined perspectives of the different social science disci-
plines to better understand the nature of society. Topics include 
research methods, ethical considerations in research, and the 
relationships among the different social sciences. Discus-
sion surveys a range of social sciences. An analysis of social 
phenomena that integrates insights from the social sciences is 
also presented. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: BEHS 201 or BEHS 210.
BEHS 220 Diversity Awareness (3)
An examination of the many dimensions of diversity within the 
framework of the social sciences. The aim is to learn how to 
interact and communicate effectively and appropriately within a 
diverse society. Emphasis is on using critical thinking to under-
stand stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination and how these 
phenomena affect society. Discussion explores how adopting 
a social science perspective on diversity can help to address 
problems in the workplace, community, culture, and society.
BEHS 250 Social Justice Movements (3)
An introductory study of movements for social justice from an 
interdisciplinary perspective. The objective is to use the theoreti-
cal approaches and concepts of the social sciences to explain 
the origin, development, evolution, and outcomes of movements 
both in the United States and around the world. Topics include 
individual and group motivations for engaging in social move-
ments; the use of social media; and ways that movements affect 
culture, society, and government. Discussion explores justice in 
the areas of climate, race, and gender, among others.
BEHS 300 Research Methods in the Social Sciences (3)
Prerequisites: BEHS 210 and STAT 200. An introduction to 
the core concepts, research methods, and skills that apply to 
work in the social sciences. The goal is to begin the process 
of conducting social science research. Discussion covers 
the scientific method, as well as quantitative and qualitative 
research methods specific to the social science disciplines of 
psychology, sociology, anthropology, and gerontology. Topics 
also include reliability and validity of data, correlation versus 
causality, research ethics, institutional review boards, proposal 
writing, and the unique contribution of interdisciplinarity in 
social science research.
BEHS 320 Disability Studies (3)
An interdisciplinary study of disability issues that focuses on 
understanding and evaluating traditional and current interpreta-
tions of the meaning of disability. The goal is to interact and 
communicate effectively and appropriately in situations relevant 
to issues of disability. Topics include the construction of images 
of people with disabilities; attitudes and actions toward those 
with disabilities; approaches taken by major social institutions 
(e.g., law, education, religion, the arts) toward disability; distinc-
tions between different models of disability; and current issues 
in disability studies.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
207
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BEHS 343 Parenting Today (3)
An overview of critical issues in modern parenting in the United 
States and the world. The objective is to use an interdisciplinary 
perspective to apply research and theory in family development 
to practical decision-making, taking into account modern and 
historical trends such as gender roles, socioeconomic status, 
and single parenting and the impact of divorce on children. 
Discussion examines the role of race and ethnicity in parenting, 
LGBT parenting, and multigenerational and military families.
BEHS 364 Alcohol in U.S. Society (3)
An interdisciplinary examination of the use and abuse of the 
drug alcohol from the perspectives of psychology, physiology, 
sociology, medicine, counseling, law, and public health. The aim 
is to examine current research and trends in the treatment of 
alcohol abuse and dependence (including prevention, assess-
ment, and intervention) and to explore the history, etiology, 
effects, and current treatment practices. The effects of alcohol 
throughout the lifespan are explored in relation to gender, fami-
lies, race, age, the workplace, and public safety.
BEHS 380 End of Life: Issues and Perspectives (3)
(Formerly GERO 380.) An exploration of death, dying, and 
bereavement from social, cultural, psychological, biomedical, 
economic, and historical perspectives. The objective is to clarify 
one’s personal perspective on death and dying, based on a bet-
ter understanding of end-of-life planning issues, stages of death, 
and models of care for the dying. Topics include definitions 
of death, needs of the dying and their support systems, pain 
management, palliative and hospice care, end-of-life decision-
making, cultural meanings and rituals, suicide, euthanasia, 
homicide, natural disaster, the economics of death and life-
sustaining care, family conflict and coping, bereavement, and 
grieving. Students may earn credit for only one of the following 
courses: BEHS 380 or GERO 380.
BEHS 453 Domestic Violence (3)
An examination of the complex phenomenon of domestic 
violence from a multidisciplinary perspective that integrates 
individual, social, political, cultural/ethnic, economic, legal, 
and medical viewpoints. The aim is to evaluate research and 
theoretical models of domestic violence; assess institutional, 
community, and individual responses to domestic violence; and 
locate effective resources. Topics include neglect and the physi-
cal, emotional, and sexual abuse of children, partners, and the 
elderly. Discussion also covers response systems and mecha-
nisms to prevent and treat violence. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: BEHS 453 or BEHS 454.
BEHS 486A Workplace Learning in Behavioral  
and Social Sciences (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
BEHS 486B Workplace Learning in Behavioral  
and Social Sciences (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
BEHS 495 Social Sciences Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: BEHS 300 and completion of all requirements 
for the social science major. A study of the social sciences that 
integrates perspectives from various disciplines in the field. The 
aim is to apply theoretical perspectives and empirical evidence 
to address complex contemporary social problems and become 
better consumers and purveyors of knowledge and research. 
Topics include ethical and professional issues inherent in work-
ing in the social sciences and the role of advocacy in promoting 
social change.
Biology 
BIOL 101 Concepts of Biology (3)
(Not open to students majoring in biotechnology or laboratory 
management.) An introduction to the structure and function 
of living organisms. The objective is to use knowledge about 
biological principles and scientific reasoning to make informed 
decisions about the natural world. Topics include the chemical 
foundations of life, cell biology, genetics, evolution, ecosystems, 
and the interdependence of living organisms. Discussion also 
covers the importance of the scientific method to biological 
inquiry and the impact of biological knowledge and technology 
on human societies. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: BIOL 101 or BIOL 103.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
208
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BIOL 102 Laboratory in Biology (1)
(Not open to students majoring in biotechnology or laboratory 
management. Fulfills the laboratory science requirement only 
with previous or concurrent credit for BIOL 101.) Prerequisite 
or corequisite: BIOL 101. A hands-on study of the structure and 
function of living organisms. The goal is to apply the scientific 
method and to use scientific and quantitative reasoning to 
make informed decisions about experimental results in the bio-
logical sciences. Laboratory exercises emphasize the scientific 
method and explore topics such as the chemical foundations of 
living organisms, cell structure and function, and the classifica-
tion of organisms. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: BIOL 102 or BIOL 103.
BIOL 103 Introduction to Biology (4)
(Not open to students majoring in biotechnology or laboratory 
management or to students who have completed BIOL 101 
or BIOL 102. Fulfills the laboratory science requirement.) An 
introduction to the structure and function of living organisms. 
The aim is to apply the scientific method and use scientific 
and quantitative reasoning to make informed decisions about 
experimental results in the biological sciences. Topics include 
the chemical foundations of life, cell biology, genetics, evolu-
tion, ecosystems, and the interdependence of living organisms. 
Discussion also covers the importance of the scientific method 
to biological inquiry and the impact of biological knowledge and 
technology on human societies. Laboratory activities empha-
size the scientific method. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following: BIOL 101–BIOL 102 or BIOL 103. 
 BIOL 105 Principles of Biology (4)
(For students majoring or minoring in science. Fulfills the labora-
tory science requirement.) An introduction to the basic principles 
of biology. The goal is to apply knowledge about biological 
principles, the scientific method, and quantitative reasoning to 
effectively communicate an understanding of biological topics 
and research. Topics include the scientific method and biologi-
cal processes and functions, with a special emphasis on cellular 
and molecular biology. 
BIOL 160 Human Biology (3)
(Science background not required.) A general introduction 
to human structure, functions, genetics, evolution, and ecol-
ogy. The aim is to use scientific reasoning to make informed 
decisions about topics related to human biology. The human 
organism is examined from the basic cellular level and genetics, 
through organ systems, to interaction with the outside world. 
Discussion also covers pertinent health topics. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: BIOL 160  
or GNSC 160.
BIOL 161 Laboratory in Human Biology (1)
(Fulfills the laboratory science requirement only with previous 
or concurrent credit for BIOL 160.) Prerequisite or corequisite: 
BIOL 160. A laboratory study that uses the human organism as 
an example to illustrate the concepts underlying the organiza-
tion and interrelationships of all living organisms.
BIOL 164 Introduction to Human Anatomy  
and Physiology (3)
Prerequisite: BIOL 101, BIOL 103, or BIOL 160. An introduction 
to the anatomy and physiology of the human organism. Topics 
include basic concepts of physics and chemistry that are neces-
sary for understanding biological functions and the structure 
and function of cells, tissues, and the major organ systems in 
the body. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: BIOL 164 or GNSC 161.
BIOL 181 Life in the Oceans (3)
An introductory study of the major groups of plants and animals 
in various marine environments, as well as their interactions 
with each other and the nonliving components of the ocean. The 
objective is to use scientific reasoning to make informed deci-
sions about topics related to marine biology. Discussion covers 
the impact of human activity on life in the ocean and the poten-
tial uses and misuses of the ocean. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: BIOL 181 or ZOOL 181.
BIOL 220 Human Genetics (3)
An introduction to the role of genes in inheritance of traits and 
genetic diseases and disorders. The goal is to understand how 
genes affect physical appearance and behavior. Topics include 
Mendelian and non-Mendelian inheritance of human genetic 
diseases, human genetic variation, and mechanisms underlying 
human diseases. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: BIOL 220, BIOL 222, or BSCI 222.
BIOL 230 General Microbiology (4)
(For students majoring or minoring in a science. Fulfills the 
laboratory science requirement.) Prerequisite: BIOL 103 or 
other introductory biology course with laboratory. An inves-
tigation of fundamental concepts in morphology, physiology, 
genetics, immunology, ecology, and pathogenic microbiology. 
Applications of microbiology to medicine, the food industry, and 
biotechnology are considered. Student may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BIOL 230, BIOL 302, BIOL 331, 
BIOL 398G, BSCI 223, MICB 200, or MICB 388A.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
209
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BIOL 301 Human Health and Disease (3)
(For students majoring in both science and nonscience 
disciplines.) A survey of the mechanisms of disease and their 
expression in major organ systems of the human body. The goal 
is to use scientific reasoning to make informed decisions about 
matters related to human biology and health. Topics include 
infections, cancer, heart disease, lung disease, diabetes, stroke, 
malnutrition, poisoning by environmental toxins, stress, inflam-
mation, disorders of the immune system, and aging. Emphasis 
is on analysis of factors that cause disruption of healthy body 
functions, leading to disease, and on prevention of disease 
through control of risk factors and early detection. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: BIOL 
301 or BIOL 398H.
BIOL 302 Bacteria, Viruses, and Health (3)
(For students majoring in both science and nonscience disci-
plines.) An introductory study of the basic structure, genetic 
and regulatory systems, and life cycles of bacteria and viruses 
and how they relate to health, infectious disease, and illness. 
The objective is to apply knowledge of cellular and molecular 
processes and communicate synthesized knowledge of micro-
bial pathogenesis and disease prevention methods. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: BIOL 
230, BIOL 302, BIOL 331, BIOL 398G, BSCI 223, MICB 200,  
or MICB 388A.
BIOL 304 The Biology of Cancer (3)
(For students majoring in both science and nonscience disci-
plines.) An overview of the biological basis of cancer. The goal 
is to apply knowledge of cancer biology to adopt appropriate 
lifestyle strategies and evaluate current treatments. The causes, 
development, and progression of cancer are considered at 
the level of cell structure and function. The roles of genes and 
proteins are also examined. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: BIOL 304 or GNSC 398C.
BIOL 307 The Biology of Aging (3)
(For students majoring in both science and nonscience disci-
plines.) An overview of the biological basis of aging. The goal is 
to apply knowledge of the aging process to influence personal 
lifestyle choices, public health policy, and economic decisions. 
Topics include typical changes that occur in cells, molecules, 
metabolism, and structure during the aging process. The devel-
opment and progression of several diseases associated with 
aging (including cancer, neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, osteoporosis, and loss 
of visual acuity and memory) are discussed with respect to the 
role of genes, proteins, and environmental influences. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: BIOL 
307 or BIOL 398V.
BIOL 318 Biology and the Climate Crisis (3)
An examination of the causes and effects of climate change 
and its impact on people, the environment, and the ecosys-
tems we all depend on. The goal is to connect food and water 
security, health, equity, and urban living conditions to the chang-
ing global climate and changes in temperatures, precipitation 
patterns, sea levels, and ocean chemistry. Discussion covers 
how ecological systems support a stable climate and how wild 
flora, fauna, and ecological communities are threatened by 
rapid anthropogenic climate change. Topics include biologi-
cally based solutions that protect human health and well-being, 
especially for vulnerable populations, as well as preserve and 
restore the ecosystem diversity and stability that assure long-
term persistence of life on Earth. 
BIOL 320 Forensic Biology (3)
Recommended: BIOL 101, BIOL 103, or BIOL 160. An introduc-
tion to the basic principles of biology as applied to the field of 
forensic science. The aim is to use scientific reasoning to draw 
conclusions and make decisions about forensic techniques, 
analyses, and results. Topics include the biological features and 
characteristics of evidentiary materials, as well as the basic 
principles of chemistry, cell biology, microbiology, and genetics 
that underlie forensic analyses.
BIOL 325 Inquiries in Biological Science (3)
Prerequisite: BIOL 105. An overview of biological principles and 
current trends in biological science. The goal is to apply knowl-
edge of core biological principles, critically analyze current 
research, and use scientific reasoning to make evaluative deci-
sions related to applications in the biological sciences. Topics 
include the scientific process, core biological concepts, careers 
in biology-related fields, and safety and health policies relevant 
to biological research.
BIOL 328 Bioethics (3)
Recommended: BIOL 101 and WRTG 112 or equivalent. An 
introduction to ethical decision-making related to human life 
and health. The aim is to form defensible positions and carefully 
crafted arguments based on well-supported evidence. Discus-
sion covers reproductive issues, biological research, and health-
care. Emphasis is on scientific and philosophical thinking.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
210
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BIOL 350 Molecular and Cellular Biology (3)
(For students majoring or minoring in a science.) Prerequisite: 
BIOL 325. A thorough examination of the basic structure and 
function of cells, with an emphasis on eukaryotic cell biology. 
The objective is to use knowledge of molecular biology to  
interpret results and draw conclusions about research findings 
and technological applications. Topics include cell-cycle growth 
and death; protein structure; DNA replication, repair, and recom-
bination; gene expression; RNA processing; and molecular trans-
port, traffic, and signaling. Discussion also covers the application 
of recombinant DNA, genetic engineering, and other current 
molecular biology technologies. Students may receive credit  
for only one of the following courses: BIOL 350 or BIOL 398S.
BIOL 357 Bioinformatics (3)
Prerequisite: BIOL 325 or another upper-level biology course. 
Recommended: IFSM 201 and MATH 105 (or a more advanced 
MATH or STAT course). An introduction to the use of computers 
in the analysis of nucleic acid and protein sequences and a study 
of the significance of these analyses. The goal is to develop 
an understanding of the software used in bioinformatics and 
learn how to address specific questions in biotechnology and 
research. Topics include genome analysis, evolutionary relation-
ships, structure-function identification, protein pattern recogni-
tion, protein-protein interaction, and algorithms.
BIOL 362 Neurobiology (3)
Prerequisite: BIOL 101, BIOL 103, or BIOL 160. An in-depth dis-
cussion of the biology and development of the nervous system. 
The goal is to apply knowledge of neurobiological principles to 
advanced studies or careers and be more informed healthcare 
consumers. Topics include neuronal structure and function; 
communication at the synapse; membrane receptors and intra- 
and intercellular signaling systems; gross organization of the 
brain and spinal cord; the processing of sensory information; 
the programming of motor responses; research techniques;  
ethics; brain development; plasticity; and higher functions  
such as learning, memory, cognition, and speech.
BIOL 398 Special Topics in Biology (3)
A study of topics in biology of special interest to students  
and faculty. May be repeated to a maximum of 6 credits when 
topics differ.
BIOL 422 Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases (3)
Prerequisite: BIOL 230, BIOL 301, BIOL 302, or BIOL 398G. Rec-
ommended: WRTG 393. An investigation of factors contributing 
to the emergence of new infectious diseases and the resur-
gence of diseases once thought to have been controlled. The 
goal is to synthesize and apply knowledge of research meth-
ods, integrate epidemiological information, and communicate 
knowledge to scientific and nonscientific communities. Topics 
include socioeconomic and environmental factors that contrib-
ute to the inability to prevent or control malaria, tuberculosis, 
and AIDS. Disease symptoms, patterns of spread, and possible 
control measures are examined for new infectious diseases 
(such as Lyme disease and those caused by E. coli O157, the 
Ebola virus, hantaviruses, and cryptosporidia). Discussion also 
covers resurgent diseases such as anthrax, bubonic plague, 
dengue, influenza, and cholera. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BIOL 422 or MICB 388E.
BIOL 486A Workplace Learning in Biology (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
BIOL 486B Workplace Learning in Biology (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
BIOL 495 Life Sciences Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: BIOL 325. Recommended: A statistics course. An 
examination of current topics, trends, and applications in the life 
sciences. The aim is to be familiar with life science laboratory 
and industry environments, communicate scientific principles 
effectively, practice professional ethics, and demonstrate 
knowledge of safe laboratory operations. Topics include current 
research, ways to recognize future trends, strategies to solve cur-
rent challenges, and creative solutions for developing products 
and services in the life sciences. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BIOL 400 or BIOL 495.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
211
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Business and 
Management 
BMGT 110 Introduction to Business and Management (3)
(For students with little or no business background. Recom-
mended preparation for many other BMGT courses.) An intro-
duction to the fundamental concepts of business management 
and leadership. The objective is to understand the interrelated 
dynamics of business, society, and the economy. Discussion  
covers business principles and practices in the context of  
everyday business events and human affairs and from a his-
torical perspective.
BMGT 121A Solve Problems, Make Decisions (1)
An introduction to problem-solving and decision-making, focus-
ing on the difference between them and the inherent bias we 
have in dealing with them. The aim is to differentiate problem-
solving and decision-making, evaluate personal skill levels in 
solving problems, and develop a tailored approach toward solv-
ing complex problems and making complex decisions. Topics 
include common problem-solving methodologies and decision-
making strategies and the individual skills needed to employ 
them effectively.
BMGT 121B Communication and Collaboration (1)
An in-depth evaluation and application of successful collabora-
tion and communication skills. The aim is to identify success-
ful personal communication practices and skills needed for 
successful collaboration with others in the workplace. Topics 
include individual specific verbal and active listening skills, 
methods for interpreting nonverbal emotional intelligence cues, 
and techniques for troubleshooting daily communication.
BMGT 160 Principles of Management (3)
(Formerly MGST 160.) An introductory study of the skills required 
to effectively and efficiently manage employees and workflow 
within an organization. Focus is on the role of a manager to plan, 
organize, and control the workload through the development of 
effective relationships with employees. Topics include the role 
and function of a manager, motivation strategies, verbal and non-
verbal communication skills, employee diversity, problem-solving 
and decision-making skills, and the influence of external organi-
zational forces on work performance. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: BMGT 160 or MGST 160.
BMGT 304 Managing E-Commerce in Organizations (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to the management 
of e-commerce organizations. The objective is to identify and 
demonstrate the unique skills needed to manage a sustainable 
e-commerce organization. Topics include e-commerce manage-
ment principles, human resource management, information 
systems, knowledge management principles, e-marketing, vir-
tual customer and supplier relations, and potential international 
legal issues. Assignments include project-based case studies 
that apply skills to modern workday problems.
BMGT 305 Knowledge Management (3)
A practical approach to knowledge management. The aim is to 
understand the value of knowledge management and the roles 
of knowledge workers and knowledge managers. Discussion 
covers how organizations capture, acquire, and share knowl-
edge to maintain corporate memory and to develop collabora-
tive energy. Topics include both formal and informal approaches 
to knowledge sharing and ways in which organizations use 
knowledge management techniques for competitive advan-
tage. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 305 or BMGT 388C.
BMGT 317 Methods of Decision-Making  
and Problem-Solving (3)
A practical examination of decision-making and problem-solving. 
The goal is to use a proven framework to generate potential 
solutions for effective decision-making and problem-solving. 
Discussion covers the cultural impact of decision-making, includ- 
ing stakeholders’ expectations. Topics include root cause analy-
sis, risks and uncertainty, potential solutions and alternatives, 
key performance indicators, psychological traps, and the steps 
to assure effectiveness before and after decision implementa-
tion. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 317 or TMGT 310.
BMGT 330 Entrepreneurship and  
New Venture Planning (3)
Recommended: BMGT 364. An overview of entrepreneurship 
and planning new business ventures for aspiring entrepre-
neurs and managers. The objective is to create and present a 
high-quality business plan for a new venture using marketing 
research and financial analytical techniques. Topics include pro-
files of entrepreneurs; benefits, risks, and challenges; financial 
management; access to capital; and franchising. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 330, 
FINC 310, MGMT 330, or SBUS 200.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
212
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BMGT 335 Small Business Management (3)
Recommended: BMGT 317. A comprehensive review of the 
management principles underlying organizational develop-
ment and growth and business life-cycle segments of emerging 
enterprises. The goal is to demonstrate an understanding of 
small business management in a global context, differenti-
ate between micro- and macro-organizational structures, and 
identify the critical elements of business sustainability. Topics 
include entrepreneurship, financing/capitalization, innovation, 
and human resource and strategic planning. Core components 
of small business management are explored and evaluated 
through a multifaceted approach.
BMGT 339 Introduction to Federal Contracting (3)
An overview of the federal contracting process, including the 
requirements and techniques of federal contracting. The objec-
tive is to document needs in writing, develop evaluation criteria, 
and review and assess contractor performance. Activities 
include planning, evaluating award criteria, and assessing per-
formance. Discussion also covers critical contract issues. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
BMGT 339, MGMT 220, or MGMT 339.
BMGT 364 Management and Organization Theory (3)
Recommended: BMGT 110. An examination of the four func-
tions of management—planning, organizing, leading, and 
controlling—with emphasis on the application of management 
concepts and theories to achieve organizational goals. The aim 
is to develop strategies, goals, and objectives to enhance perfor-
mance and sustainability. Topics include ethics, social respon-
sibility, globalization, and change and innovation. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 364, 
TEMN 202, TEMN 300, TMGT 301, or TMGT 302.
BMGT 365 Organizational Leadership (3)
Prerequisite: BMGT 110 or BMGT 364. An exploration of leader-
ship as a critical skill for the 21st century, when change occurs 
rapidly and consistently. The objective is to use leadership 
theory and assessment tools to evaluate one’s own leadership 
skills. Focus is on the leadership skills needed to develop com-
mitted and productive individuals and high-performing organi-
zations. Topics include vision, values, culture, ethics, and the 
interaction between the organization and the external environ-
ment. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 365, MGMT 300, MGST 310, or TEMN 310.
BMGT 380 Business Law I (3)
(Strongly recommended for students seeking careers as CPAs, 
lawyers, or managers.) A conceptual and functional analysis 
and application of legal principles and concepts relevant to the 
conduct and understanding of commercial business transac-
tions in the domestic and global environments. The aim is 
to evaluate sources of law, legal process, procedures, and 
remedies and to analyze tort, criminal, and contractual rights, 
obligations, liabilities, and remedies in the business environ-
ment. Topics include the legal, ethical, and social environments 
of business; civil and criminal law; agency; types of business 
organizations; and contracts and sales agreements.
BMGT 381 Business Law II (3)
(Strongly recommended for students seeking careers as CPAs, 
lawyers, or managers.) Prerequisite: BMGT 380. Further concep-
tual and functional analysis and application of legal principles 
relevant to the conduct and understanding of commercial busi-
ness transactions in the domestic and global environment. The 
aim is to evaluate sources of law, legal process, procedures, and 
remedies and to analyze tort, criminal, and contractual rights, 
obligations, liabilities, and remedies in the business environ-
ment. Topics include personal and real property, leases, antitrust, 
business insurance, accountants’ liability, negotiable instru-
ments, secured transactions, government regulation affecting 
consumer protection, environmental protection, debtor/creditor 
relationships, and bankruptcy and reorganization.
BMGT 392 Global Business (3)
Recommended: BMGT 110. An overview of key concepts and 
issues relevant to conducting business in the global environ-
ment. Emphasis is on applying fundamental knowledge of 
global business and analyzing and evaluating global business 
variables for informed decision-making. The objective is to 
analyze property rights, obligations, liabilities, and remedies; 
evaluate regulations in the business environment; and assess 
implications of transactions and negotiable instruments in the 
business environment. Topics include the nature and scope of 
global business; cultural, political, legal, and economic environ-
ments; marketing; trade; and foreign investments. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 
392, MGMT 305, or TMGT 390.
BMGT 398 Special Topics in Business  
and Management (1–3)
Intensive inquiry into special topics in business and manage-
ment that reflect the changing needs and interests of students 
and faculty.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
213
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BMGT 411 Process Improvement (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to process improve-
ment. The objective is to assess the root cause of a problem; 
gain buy-in for the improvement; map the process; establish 
internal controls; and apply a variety of metrics to improve pro-
cesses, test improvement solutions, and implement the process 
improvement. Emphasis is on process improvements that are 
cost-effective and add value to organizational missions. Topics 
include meeting customer expectations, flowcharting, selecting 
approaches to change management, acquiring resources, and 
sustaining improvements. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: BMGT 411 or TMGT 411.
BMGT 456 Managing Across Cultures and Borders (3)
Recommended: BMGT 110. An examination and analysis of 
international management across cultures and borders. The 
aim is to apply critical-thinking and analytical skills in global 
management settings. Focus is on the roles of business man-
agers in today’s complex global environment. Topics include 
cross-cultural strategic planning, multinational organizational 
structures, global leadership, cross-cultural communication, 
environmental factors, decision-making, and negotiations. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
BMGT 456 or BMGT 498R.
BMGT 464 Organizational Behavior (3)
Prerequisite: BMGT 364. A study of how the manager uses 
knowledge of people’s behavior in the workplace to develop 
best practices to build relationships that foster a more efficient 
and effective organization. The aim is to examine organiza-
tions and the way people behave in an organizational setting 
to develop the types of skills that encourage the organization’s 
best workplace behavior. Topics include motivation, emotional 
intelligence, employee and organizational diversity, engagement 
in job performance, job commitment, and workplace culture.
BMGT 465 Organizational Change Management (3)
Prerequisite: BMGT 364. An examination of the systematic 
process of organizational change management, including data 
collection, diagnosis, action planning, intervention, and evalua-
tion. The goal is to increase the effectiveness of an organization 
to develop the potential of all individuals. Activities include iden-
tifying and diagnosing organizational problems or opportunities 
utilizing management skills that support organizational change. 
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 465, MGMT 398K, MGMT 465, or TMGT 350.
BMGT 466 Global Public Management (3)
Recommended: BMGT 110. A comprehensive study of pub-
lic management. The aim is to analyze, design, and evaluate 
solutions to public-sector problems, both domestic and global, 
based on an understanding of public-sector management con-
cepts and the different types of organizations involved. Topics 
include development and implementation of public-sector proj-
ects and the finance, human resources, and marketing activities 
that support them. Discussion also covers public management 
in diverse regions of the world, as well as the purpose and man-
agement of intergovernmental organizations and nongovern-
mental organizations. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: BMGT 366, BMGT 466, or TMGT 305.
BMGT 484 Organizational Collaboration (3)
Prerequisite: BMGT 364. A theoretical and practical investiga-
tion into organizational collaboration. The aim is to define the 
purpose, types, and use of collaboration by managers in modern 
organizations and the skills managers require for successful 
collaborations. Topics include development of skills in team 
dynamics, factors that foster team cohesion and performance, 
individual and group virtual collaboration, and decision-making.
BMGT 485 Applied Management (3)
(Intended as the final, capstone course for management studies 
majors, to be taken in the last 15 credits, but appropriate for 
anyone who aspires to a management position.) Prerequisites: 
BMGT 317, BMGT 364, BMGT 464 (or BMGT 465), and BMGT 
484. An integration and application of managerial skills used 
in successful organizations. The goal is to integrate previously 
learned management skills—including the four functions of 
management, applied decision-making, team building, organiza-
tional behavior, and organizational change—and to apply them 
to achieve individual and organizational excellence.
BMGT 486A Workplace Learning in Business  
and Management (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
BMGT 486B Workplace Learning in Business  
and Management (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
214
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BMGT 487 Project Management I (3)
(The first course in the two-course series BMGT 487–488.) 
An introduction to the terminology, principles, concepts, and 
practices of project management. The goal is to demonstrate 
the skills required to manage a project through all project 
phases, such as scope, scheduling, and cost. Traditional, agile, 
and hybrid project management approaches are compared to 
present key considerations of each method. The importance of 
soft skills like communication and stakeholder engagement is 
also underscored. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: BMGT 487 or TMGT 430.
BMGT 488 Project Management II (3)
(The second course in the two-course series BMGT 487-488.) 
Prerequisite: BMGT 487. An examination of project management 
processes and applications beyond introductory principles and 
concepts. The goal is to manage a project through all phases  
of the project life cycle. Emphasis is on the practical applica-
tions of project management principles and processes  
in real-world situations. Projects depict real-world situa-
tions, such as information systems implementations; service 
business/e-commerce projects; and consulting projects that 
occur in research, information systems, manufacturing, and 
engineering firms. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: BMGT 488 or TMGT 430.
BMGT 495 Strategic Management (3)
(Access to spreadsheet, word processing, and presentation 
software required. Intended as a final, capstone course to be 
taken in a student’s last 15 credits.) Prerequisites: BMGT 364, 
BMGT 365, FINC 330 (or BMGT 340), and MRKT 310. A study 
of strategic management that focuses on integrating manage-
ment, marketing, finance/accounting, production/operations, 
services, research and development, and information systems 
functions to achieve organizational success. The aim is to 
apply integrative analysis, practical application, and critical 
thinking to the conceptual foundation gained through previous 
study and personal experience. Emphasis is on developing an 
organizational vision and mission, developing and implementing 
strategic plans, and evaluating outcomes. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 495, HMGT 
430, MGMT 495, or TMGT 380.
BMGT 496 Business Ethics (3)
A study of the relationship of business ethics and social respon-
sibility in both domestic and global settings. The aim is to 
explore ethical and moral considerations of corporate conduct, 
social responsibilities, policies, and strategies. Emphasis is on 
the definition, scope, application, and analysis of ethical values 
as they relate to issues of public and organizational conse-
quence and business decision-making in the domestic and 
global business environments.
Career Planning 
CAPL 198A Effective Time Management (1)
A hands-on exploration of effective time management strategies. 
The objective is to develop a personal time management plan. 
Topics include procrastination, ways to use time productively, the 
myth of multitasking, and approaches to achieving a balance. 
Discussion includes personal tendencies for managing time and 
recognizing and planning for prioritizing one’s tasks. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: CAPL 
198A or MGST 198B.
CAPL 198B Career Transitions (1)
An exploration of career paths and skills. The goal is to assess 
one’s prior education and experiences to determine possible 
career paths. Topics include the identification of skills gaps, 
strategies for preparing a résumé aligned with the career, and 
best practices for successful integration into the civilian work-
force. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: CAPL 198B or MGST 198M.
CAPL 198C Interviewing Skills (1)
A comprehensive exploration of skills and strategies needed for 
successful interviews. The aim is to articulate personal skills, 
education, and experience as they relate to a target position. 
Topics include body language, nonverbal cues, and candidacy 
for various positions. Discussions explore previous interview 
experiences, strategies for success during interviews, and deter-
mining whether the position may be a good fit. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CAPL 198C 
or MGST 198L.
CAPL 398A Career Planning Management (1)
A survey of strategies for managing career change. Focus is 
on examining, evaluating, and assessing individual skill sets; 
networking; and researching career and economic markets. 
The objective is to formulate a career path and develop the 
resources needed to enter that path. Topics include résumé and 
cover letter development, interviewing techniques, negotiation 
strategies, and tools for ongoing career planning.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
215
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CAPL 495 General Studies Capstone (3)
The analysis and evaluation of knowledge and skills gained from 
previous study. A capstone project connects an area of study to 
a real-world scenario and includes the presentation of a portfolio 
linking one’s experience with personal and professional goals.
Chemistry 
CHEM 103 General Chemistry I (4)
(For students majoring or minoring in a science; not appropriate 
for nonscience students fulfilling general education require-
ments. Fulfills the laboratory science requirement. ) Prerequi-
site: MATH 107 or MATH 115. A study of the nature and compo-
sition of matter. Elements, inorganic compounds, and chemical 
calculations are covered. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: CHEM 102, CHEM 103, CHEM 105, 
CHEM 107, or CHEM 121.
CHEM 113 General Chemistry II (4)
(For students majoring or minoring in a science; not appropriate 
for nonscience students fulfilling general education require-
ments. Fulfills the laboratory science requirement.) Prerequisite: 
CHEM 103 or CHEM 105. A study of kinetics; homogeneous, 
heterogeneous, and ionic equilibria; oxidation/reduction reac-
tions; electrochemistry; and chemistry of the elements. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CHEM 113 or CHEM 115.
CHEM 121 Chemistry in the Modern World (3)
(For students not majoring or minoring in science.) An explora-
tion of chemistry as it relates to human life and the environ-
ment. The goal is to use a working knowledge of chemical 
principles, scientific reasoning, and quantitative reasoning to 
make informed decisions about health and safety matters. 
Discussion examines natural processes and human factors 
in the modern world using the principles of chemistry and the 
scientific method. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: CHEM 102, CHEM 103, CHEM 104, CHEM 
105, CHEM 107, CHEM 121, CHEM 297, or GNSC 140.
CHEM 297 Environmental Chemistry (3)
Prerequisite(s): MATH 115 (or MATH 107 and MATH 108). An 
examination of the chemistry of environmental systems. The 
aim is to identify and evaluate fundamental principles of chem-
istry in relation to environmental systems. Discussion covers 
the nature of atoms, types of bonding, functional groups, chemi-
cal reactivity, and chemical interactions. Topics also include 
migration of chemicals through the environment, the role of 
basic chemistry in biogeochemical cycles, and human impact 
on biogeochemical cycles through the use of technology. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CHEM 102, CHEM 103, CHEM 104, CHEM 105, CHEM 107, CHEM 
121, CHEM 297, or GNSC 140.
Chinese 
CHIN 111 Elementary Chinese I (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Chinese; assumes no prior knowledge of Chinese. Students 
with prior experience with the Chinese language should take a 
placement test to assess appropriate level.) An introduction to 
spoken and written Mandarin Chinese. The objective is to com-
municate in Chinese in some concrete real-life situations using 
culturally appropriate language and etiquette, to read and write 
pinyin, and to begin to recognize and type Chinese characters. 
Practice is provided in Chinese pronunciation, tones, and struc-
tures needed for everyday communication.
CHIN 112 Elementary Chinese II (3)
(Not open to native speakers of Chinese.) Prerequisite: CHIN 
111 or appropriate score on a placement test. A continued intro-
duction to spoken and written Mandarin Chinese. The goal is to 
communicate in Chinese in concrete real-life situations using 
culturally appropriate language and etiquette and to recognize 
and type some frequently used Chinese characters. Practice 
is provided in improving pronunciation and developing the oral 
and written skills used in everyday communication.
CHIN 114 Elementary Chinese III (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Chinese.) Prerequisite: CHIN 112 or appropriate score on a 
placement test. Further development of skills in elementary 
spoken and written Mandarin Chinese. The aim is to communi-
cate in Chinese in a variety of real-life situations using culturally 
appropriate language, recognize and distinguish more com-
monly used Chinese characters, and read in context. Practice 
is provided in improving pronunciation and developing the oral 
and written skills used in everyday communication.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
216
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CHIN 115 Elementary Chinese IV (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Chinese.) Prerequisite: CHIN 114 or appropriate score on a place-
ment test. Further development of skills in elementary spoken 
and written Mandarin Chinese. The aim is to interact effectively 
with native speakers of Chinese in a variety of real-life situa-
tions using culturally appropriate language and to recognize and 
distinguish more commonly used Chinese characters in context. 
Practice in fine-tuning pronunciation and applying language 
skills to a range of contexts is provided.
Communication Studies 
COMM 200 Military Communication and Writing (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications.) 
A study of business communication management in a military 
context. The objective is to develop appropriate and effective 
communication products for military audiences and within 
military environments through the application of accepted 
business communication practices. Topics include communica-
tion theories; research methods; organization of information; 
formats; writing and editing strategies; and techniques for 
guiding subordinate communication, conducting interviews, and 
managing meetings. Assignments may include making speech 
presentations; instructing a class; conducting interviews; man-
aging meetings; and writing and editing reports, letters, emails, 
proposals, and personnel evaluations.
COMM 202 Media and Society (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications 
but is not a writing course.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equiva-
lent. An overview of the complex components and relationships 
involved in today’s media. The goal is to understand the techni-
cal, political, economic, cultural, and organizational influences 
on mediated messages. Topics include visual rhetoric, legal and 
ethical issues, social media, the transactional model, advertis-
ing, security, and privacy concerns.
COMM 207 Understanding Visual Communication (3)
A study of the creation and interpretation of visual language. 
The aim is to understand how images are used to effectively 
communicate ideas in a variety of channels, including news, 
advertising, and public relations. Topics include aesthetics, 
principles of composition, color systems, content awareness, 
and historical and cultural perspectives. Emphasis is on criti-
cal thinking and analysis of images from both theoretical and 
practical perspectives.
COMM 300 Communication Theory (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications 
but is not a writing course.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equiva-
lent. An introduction to communication theory. The objective is 
to apply communication theory and evaluate communication 
situations. The basic theories of human communication, mass 
communication, and new media and technology are explored. 
Focus is on the relationships among communication theory, 
research, and practice. Topics include intra- and interpersonal 
communication, public communication, mass media, and con-
temporary issues associated with mediated communication.
COMM 302 Mass Communication and Media Studies (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications 
but is not a writing course.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112, WRTG 101, 
or WRTG 101S. A survey of mass communication designed to 
enhance media literacy. The goal is to interpret, evaluate, and 
produce media messages. Topics include media industries and 
the impact of the media, as well as regulation, policy, and ethical 
issues. Emphasis is on critical thinking and analysis of vital 
aspects of pervasive elements of popular culture, such as news, 
advertising, children’s entertainment, and a free press. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: COMM 
302 or COMM 379A.
COMM 390 Writing for Managers (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications.) 
Prerequisite: WRTG 112, WRTG 101, or WRTG 101S. A practicum 
in the kinds of communication skills that managers need for the 
workplace. The goal is to develop persuasive managerial com-
munication for organizational decision-making and action. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
COMM 390, HUMN 390, WRTG 390, or WRTG 490.
COMM 400 Mass Media Law (3)
(No previous study of law required. Fulfills the general edu-
cation requirement in communications but is not a writing 
course.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. Recommended: 
WRTG 391, WRTG 393, or WRTG 394. An examination of impor-
tant legal issues that affect mass media and communications 
professionals. The objective is to analyze mass media law, its 
evolution, and its relationship with society, culture, and politics. 
Topics include copyright, intellectual property, fair use, defama-
tion, privacy, freedom of information, freedom of speech, and 
freedom of the press, as well as issues raised by the growth of 
the internet. Discussion also covers ethics in mass media, digi-
tal technologies, and the creation of media content. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: COMM 
400 or JOUR 400.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
217
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
COMM 459 Special Topics in Communication (1–3)
An exploration of special topics in communication. The objective 
is to attain specialized knowledge and skills in a particular area 
of communication, journalism, speech, or professional writing. 
Focus is on demonstrating new knowledge through an extended 
applied project. May be repeated to a maximum of 6 credits 
when topics differ.
COMM 480 Research Methods  
in Communication Studies (3)
Prerequisites: COMM 300 and COMM 302. A review of qualita-
tive and quantitative research methods in communication stud-
ies. The objective is to define and explain research methods, 
concepts, and tools; apply research design, data collection, 
analysis, and reporting skills; and critically evaluate research 
in terms of rigor, relevance, and explanatory value. Practice is 
provided in finding, consuming, and analyzing research studies. 
Discussion covers the steps of the research process: articulat-
ing a question, developing a methodology, conducting a study, 
and reporting on findings.
COMM 486A Workplace Learning  
in Communication Studies (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
COMM 486B Workplace Learning  
in Communication Studies (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
COMM 492 Grant and Proposal Writing (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications.) 
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An advanced study of 
technical writing, focusing on composing competitive proposals 
in response to Requests for Proposals (RFPs) and other fund-
ing solicitations from the federal government and community 
and private sources. The aim is to apply skills needed in the 
proposal development process; assess an RFP to determine 
evaluation and competitive criteria; and synthesize the required 
elements into a successful proposal. Discussion covers stages 
of the proposal-development process, including researching the 
funding agency for its mission, target populations, and prob-
lems of interest; assessing the RFP to determine evaluation cri-
teria; and assembling the required elements of a successful pro-
posal. Assignments include writing a grant request and working 
in teams to prepare a competitive business proposal. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: COMM 
492, ENGL 489C, or WRTG 494.
COMM 495 Communication Studies Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: COMM 300, COMM 302, and at least 9 additional 
credits of upper-level COMM, SPCH, and/or JOUR courses.  
Recommended: COMM 390. A project-based capstone study  
of communication. The aim is to reflect on the knowledge and 
skills gained through previous coursework and experiences in 
the discipline.
Computer Information 
Technology 
Courses in computer information technology (designated CMIT) 
have higher computing requirements than the minimum techni-
cal requirements stated on p. 26. They require an Intel Core i7 
processor or higher, with speeds of 2GHz or faster, at least 6GB 
of available disk space, and at least 16GB RAM (32GB recom-
mended). Display devices should have a resolution of 1920 X 
1080 or better (PCs) or 1440 X 900 retina display (Mac).
CMIT 202 Fundamentals of Computer Troubleshooting (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the CompTIA A+ exams.) A thor-
ough review of computer hardware and software, with emphasis 
on the application of current and appropriate computing safety 
and environmental practices. The goal is to evaluate, install, 
configure, maintain, and troubleshoot computer hardware com-
ponents and operating systems.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
218
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMIT 265 Fundamentals of Networking (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the CompTIA Network+ certifi-
cation exam.) Prerequisite: CMIT 202 or CMSC 115 (or CMIS 
141). An introduction to networking technologies for local area 
networks, wide area networks, and wireless networks. The aim 
is to recognize the type of network design appropriate for a 
given scenario. Topics include the OSI (open system intercon-
nection) model, security, and networking protocols. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses:  
CMIT 265 or CMIT 265M.
CMIT 291 Introduction to Linux (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Linux Professional Institute 
Certification 1 [LPIC-1] and the CompTIA Linux+ certification 
exams.) Prerequisite: CMIT 202 or CMIT 265. A study of the 
Linux operating system. The goal is to configure and manage 
processes, user interfaces, device files, print facilities, file sys-
tems, task automation, the boot-up/shutdown sequence, disk 
storage, network connectivity, system security, and users and 
groups. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: CMIT 291, CMIS 390, CMIT 391, or CMIS 398U.
CMIT 320 Network Security (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the CompTIA Security+ exam.) 
Prerequisite: CMIT 265 or CompTIA Network+ certification. A 
study of the fundamental concepts of computer security and 
its implementation. The aim is to assess and mitigate risk, 
evaluate and select appropriate technologies, and apply proper 
security safeguards.
CMIT 321 Ethical Hacking (3)
(Formerly CMIT 398E. Designed to help prepare for the EC- 
Council Certified Ethical Hacker certification.) Prerequisite: CMIT 
320. Development of the structured knowledge base needed to 
discover vulnerabilities and recommend solutions for tightening 
network security and protecting data from potential attackers. 
Focus is on penetration-testing tools and techniques to protect 
computer networks. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: CMIT 321 or CMIT 398E.
CMIT 326 Cloud Technologies (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the CompTIA Cloud+ and AWS 
Certified Cloud Practitioner certification exams.) A hands-on 
study of basic cloud technologies. The aim is to apply the 
techniques and tools used in cloud environments, especially the 
AWS (Amazon Web Services) cloud. Topics include the global 
infrastructure of the cloud, deployment and operation in various 
cloud environments, high availability, scalability, elasticity, secu-
rity, and troubleshooting. AWS, Microsoft Azure, and Google 
Cloud are compared.
CMIT 336 Fundamentals of Microsoft Azure (3)
(Designed to help prepare for Exam AZ-900: Microsoft Azure 
Fundamentals.) Prerequisite: CMIT 326. A hands-on study of 
Microsoft Azure services. The aim is to demonstrate mastery 
of cloud concepts; the core services used in Azure; pricing and 
support models used for Azure; and fundamentals of cloud 
security, privacy, compliance, and trust for Microsoft Azure. Top-
ics include high availability, scalability, agility, fault tolerance, 
and disaster recovery in the Microsoft Azure environment.
CMIT 351 Switching, Routing, and Wireless Essentials (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Cisco Certified Network 
Associate [CCNA] certification examination. Course completion 
earns a Cisco-issued digital badge on the Acclaim credentials 
platform.) Prerequisite: CMIT 265. A hands-on introduction to 
Cisco internetworking devices. Focus is on switching technolo-
gies and router operations that support small to medium busi-
ness networks, including wireless local area networks (WLAN) 
and security concepts. The goal is to perform basic network 
configuration and troubleshooting; identify and mitigate LAN 
security threats; and configure and secure a basic WLAN. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CAPP 498E, CMIT 350, CMIT 351, or CMIT 499D.
CMIT 352 Enterprise Networking, Security,  
and Automation (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Cisco Certified Network 
Associate [CCNA] certification examination. Course completion 
earns a Cisco-issued digital badge on the Acclaim credentials 
platform.) Prerequisite: CMIT 351. A hands-on introduction to 
Cisco internetworking devices. Focus is on the architectures 
and considerations related to designing, securing, operating, 
and troubleshooting enterprise networks. Topics include wide 
area network (WAN) technologies and quality of service (QoS) 
mechanisms used for secure remote access, along with the 
introduction of software-defined networking, virtualization, and 
automation concepts that support the digitalization of net-
works. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: CAPP 498E, CMIT 350, CMIT 352, or CMIT 499D.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
219
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMIT 380 Managing Modern Microsoft Desktops (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Microsoft 365 Certified: Mod-
ern Desktop Administrator Associate certification examination. 
Passing the MD-100 examination earns the Microsoft-issued 
MD-100 Windows 10 digital badge on the Acclaim credentials 
platform.) Prerequisites: CMIT 202 and CMIT 320. An intro-
duction to installing, supporting, and configuring Windows 10 
desktops in an organizational environment. The aim is to install, 
customize, and update the Windows 10 Operating Systems (OS), 
including managing storage, files, and devices, and secure data 
and the Windows 10 OS, as well as troubleshoot Windows 10.  
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: CMIT 370 or CMIT 380.
CMIT 382 Managing Microsoft 365 Identity (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Microsoft 365 Certified: Enter-
prise Administrator Expert certification examination.) Prereq-
uisite: CMIT 380. An introduction to Microsoft 365 identity and 
services. The aim is to demonstrate the ability to design and 
implement Microsoft 365 services, manage user identity and 
roles, manage access and authentication, and plan Microsoft 
365 workloads and applications. Students may receive credit  
for only one of the following courses: CMIT 371 or CMIT 382.
CMIT 386 Penetration Testing and Cyber Red Teaming (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the CompTIA PenTest+ certifica-
tion exam.) Prerequisite: CMIT 321. Recommended: CMIT 291, 
CMIT 391, or the CompTIA Linux+ or Linux Professional Institute 
LPIC-1 certifications. An introduction to the concepts and skills 
necessary to perform penetration testing and red teaming. 
The goal is to use penetration testing techniques focused on 
the Penetration Testing Execution Standard (PTES)—includ-
ing preengagement interactions, intelligence gathering, threat 
modeling, vulnerability analysis, exploitation, postexploitation, 
and reporting—to perform a penetration test and present find-
ings to management. Topics include overview of tools such as 
KALI Linux and the Metasploit Framework that can be used for 
penetration testing and strategies for red teaming.
CMIT 388 Red Hat Linux System Administration I (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Red Hat Certified System 
Administrator [RHCSA] certification exam.) Prerequisite: CMIT 
291 or CMIT 391. Development of the key foundational skills 
needed by an RHCSA-certified Red Hat Enterprise Linux system 
administrator. Focus is on the knowledge, skills, and abilities 
needed to become a Linux systems expert or Linux system 
administrator. Discussion covers advanced command line con-
cepts and enterprise-level tools intended for cybersecurity pro-
fessionals who need to perform essential Linux administration 
tasks, including installation, configuring networking connectiv-
ity, managing physical storage, automation/programmability, 
and performing security administration tasks.
CMIT 420 Managing Security on Modern  
Microsoft Desktops (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Microsoft 365 Certified: 
Modern Desktop Administrator Associate certification examina-
tion.) Prerequisites: CMIT 320 and CMIT 382. An introduction 
to implementation of a Windows 10 operating system strat-
egy using modern deployment methods and implementing 
an update strategy. Focus is on methods for deployment and 
management of apps and browser-based applications. Key 
concepts include security in modern management, including 
authentication, identity, access, and compliance policies. Topics 
such as Azure Active Directory, Azure Information Protection, 
and Windows Defender Advanced Threat Protection, as well as 
how to leverage these technologies to protect devices and data, 
are covered.
CMIT 421 Threat Management and  
Vulnerability Assessment (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the CompTIA Cybersecurity 
Analyst [CySA+] certification.) Prerequisite: CMIT 320. A study 
of the analysis of data in threat and vulnerability management. 
The goal is to properly utilize various cybersecurity tools and 
technologies. Discussion covers the analysis of threats and the 
impact on incident response, as well as the tools and equipment 
used in a forensic investigation. Various industry and govern-
ment frameworks and regulatory compliance are highlighted.
CMIT 422 Managing Microsoft 365 Security (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Microsoft 365 Certified: 
Enterprise Administrator Expert certification examination.) 
Prerequisites: CMIT 320 and CMIT 382. A study of the three key 
components of Microsoft 365 services: Microsoft 365 security 
management, Microsoft 365 compliance management, and 
Microsoft 365 device management. Examination covers threat 
vectors and data breaches facing today’s organizations and key 
elements of compliance management, such as data gover-
nance, data archiving and retention, and data loss prevention. 
The aim is to gain knowledge in managing all aspects of device 
management, including comanagement, Windows Autopilot, 
Windows Analytics, and Mobile Device Management. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses:  
CMIT 373 or CMIT 422.
CMIT 424 Digital Forensics Analysis and Application (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Certified Computer Examiner 
[CCE] certification exam.) Prerequisites: CMIT 202 (or CompTIA 
A+ certification), CMIT 320 (or CompTIA Security+ certification), 
and CCJS 321. A project-driven study of the digital forensic 
evaluation process. The objective is to build forensic work- 
stations, collect evidence, extract artifacts, identify unknown 
files, and reassemble evidence from network packet captures.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
220
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMIT 425 Advanced Information Systems Security (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the (ISC)2 Certified Information 
System Security Professional [CISSP] certification exam.) Prereq-
uisite: CMIT 320 or CompTIA Network+ and Security+ certifica-
tions. A comprehensive study of information systems security to 
enhance organizational security. The goal is to manage risks by 
identifying and mitigating them. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: CMIT 425 or CMIT 499S.
CMIT 426 Mastering the AWS Cloud (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the AWS Certified Solutions  
Architect–Associate exam.) Prerequisite: CMIT 326. A hands-on 
study of Amazon Web Services (AWS). The goal is to understand 
the computing, networking, storage, and database services in 
AWS; apply best practices in building secure and reliable applica-
tions in the AWS cloud environment; and identify the appropriate 
AWS service to meet an organization’s technical requirements.
CMIT 436 Security in the Cloud (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the (ISC)2 Certified Cloud Security 
Professional exam.) Prerequisite: CMIT 326. A hands-on study 
of cybersecurity and means for securing critical assets  
in cloud environments. The goal is to apply the principles 
of confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of digital 
resources in cloud environments.
CMIT 440 Mobile Forensics (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the IACIS Certified Mobile  
Device Examiner [ICMDE] certification exam.) Prerequisite: 
CMIT 424. A project-driven study of mobile devices from a 
forensic perspective. The aim is to implement various tech-
niques to collect and analyze information from mobile devices 
used in forensic investigations.
CMIT 455 Implementing and Operating Cisco Enterprise 
Network Core Technologies (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Cisco Certified Network Pro-
fessional [CCNP] Implementing and Operating Cisco Enterprise 
Network Core Technologies [ENCOR] certification examination. 
Course completion earns a Cisco-issued digital badge on the 
Acclaim credentials platform.) Prerequisite: CMIT 350 or CMIT 
352. A comprehensive study designed to broaden the archi-
tectural understanding and deepen the implementation skills 
required in today’s enterprise networks. Discussion covers 
switching, routing, wireless, and related security topics, along 
with the technologies that support software-defined program-
mable networks. Students may receive credit for only one of  
the following courses: CMIT 451 or CMIT 455.
CMIT 456 Implementing Cisco Enterprise Advanced 
Routing and Services (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Cisco Certified Network 
Professional [CCNP] Implementing Cisco Enterprise Advanced 
Routing and Services [ENARSI] certification examination. 
Course completion earns a Cisco-issued digital badge on the 
Acclaim credentials platform.) Prerequisite: CMIT 455. An in-
depth study of the architectural understanding and implementa-
tion skills required in today’s enterprise networks. The aim is to 
implement and troubleshoot advanced routing technologies and 
services, including Layer 3, VPN services, infrastructure security, 
infrastructure services, and infrastructure automation. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: CMIT 
452 or CMIT 456.
CMIT 460 Network Forensics (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Computer Security Incident 
Handler [CSIH] certification.) Prerequisites: CMIT 320 and CMIT 
424. A project-driven study of networks from a foren-sics per-
spective. The goal is to implement various techniques that are 
used in forensic investigations in response to network intrusions 
to collect and analyze information from computer networks.
CMIT 486A Workplace Learning in Computer  
and Information Technology (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
CMIT 486B Workplace Learning in Computer  
Information Technology (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
CMIT 495 Cybersecurity Technology Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least 27 credits of CMIT course-
work. A comprehensive project-driven study of network design 
and security, with an emphasis on the integration of knowledge, 
practical applications, and critical thinking. The objective is to 
implement a secure and scalable network to meet organiza-
tional needs. Topics include advanced concepts in network and 
security design.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
221
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMIT 499 Special Topics in Computer Networks  
and Security (1–5) 
An inquiry into special topics in computer networks and  
security that reflect the changing field. May be repeated  
when topics differ.
Computer Science 
Courses in computer science (except CMSC 150) have higher 
computing requirements than the minimum technical require-
ments stated on p. 26. They require an Intel Core i7 processor 
or higher, with speeds of 2GHz and at least 8GB RAM (16GB 
recommended).
CMSC 100 Social Networking and Cybersecurity  
Best Practices (3)
(Formerly CMIS 111.) A hands-on study of current social 
networking applications and approaches to protect against 
cyberattacks and enhance personal cybersecurity. The goal is 
to collaborate and interact through personal and professional 
social networking while developing and using computer security 
best practices. Discussion covers issues associated with the 
impact of social computing on individuals and society. Projects 
include creating and maintaining accounts on selected social 
networking sites. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: CMIS 111 or CMSC 100.
CMSC 105 Introduction to Problem-Solving  
and Algorithm Design (3)
(Formerly CMIS 102.) A study of techniques for finding solu-
tions to problems through structured programming and 
step-wise refinement. The objective is to design programs 
using pseudocode and implement them in an appropriate 
programming language. Hands-on practice in debugging, test-
ing, and documenting is provided. Topics include principles of 
programming, the logic of constructing a computer program, 
and the practical aspects of integrating program modules into 
a cohesive application. Algorithms are used to demonstrate 
programming as an approach to problem-solving. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CMIS 102, 
CMIS 102A, CMSC 101, or CMSC 105.
CMSC 115 Introductory Programming (3)
(Formerly CMIS 141.) Prerequisite: CMSC 105 (or CMIS 102). A 
study of structured and object-oriented programming using the 
Java language. The goal is to design, implement, test, debug, and 
document Java programs, using appropriate development tools. 
Projects require the use of algorithms, simple data structures, 
and object-oriented concepts. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: CMIS 141, CMIS 141A, or 
CMSC 115.
CMSC 150 Introduction to Discrete Structures (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 140. A survey of fundamen-
tal mathematical concepts relevant to computer science. The 
objective is to address problems in computer science. Proof 
techniques presented are those used for modeling and solving 
problems in computer science. Discussion covers functions, 
relations, infinite sets, and propositional logic. Topics also 
include graphs and trees, as well as selected applications. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CMSC 150 or CMSC 250.
CMSC 215 Intermediate Programming (3)
(Formerly CMIS 242.) Prerequisite: CMSC 115 (or CMIS 141). 
Further study of the Java programming language. The objective is 
to design, implement, test, debug, and document Java programs, 
using appropriate development tools. Topics include object-
oriented design, event-driven programming, exceptions, recursion, 
arrays, and data structures. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: CMIS 242 or CMSC 215.
CMSC 307 Artificial Intelligence Applications (3)
(No programming or math background required.) An interactive, 
hands-on study of current artificial intelligence (AI) applications 
spanning multiple disciplines and domains, including business, 
science, communications, and computing. The goal is to use 
data sets with AI and machine learning applications from leading 
cloud vendors, including Amazon and Microsoft. Projects and 
laboratory exercises demonstrate how AI can be used to solve 
problems across a wide variety of disciplines.
CMSC 310 Computer Systems and Architecture (3)
(Formerly CMIS 310.) Prerequisite: CMSC 115 (or CMIS 141). A 
study of the fundamental concepts of computer architecture 
and factors that influence the performance of a system. The 
aim is to apply practical skills to computer systems architec-
ture. Topics include data representation, assembly language, 
central processing unit architecture, memory architecture, and 
input/output (I/O) architecture. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: CMIS 270, CMIS 310, CMSC 
310, CMSC 311, or IFSM 310.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
222
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMSC 315 Data Structures and Analysis (3)
(Formerly CMSC 350.) Prerequisite: CMSC 215 (or CMIS 242). 
A study of user-defined data structures and object-oriented 
design in computer science. The aim is to develop secure Java 
programs. Topics include linked lists, stacks, queues, arrays, 
maps, vectors, and trees. Algorithms that perform sorting, 
searching, and recursion are discussed and analyzed. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: CMSC 
350 or CMSC 315.
CMSC 320 Relational Database Concepts  
and Applications (3)
(Formerly CMIS 320.) Prerequisite: CMSC 115 (or CMIS 141). A 
study of the functions, underlying concepts, and applications of 
enterprise relational database management systems (RDBMS) 
in a business environment. The aim is to appropriately use data-
bases to meet business requirements. Discussion covers entity/
relationship diagrams, relational theory, normalization, integrity 
constraints, the Structured Query Language (SQL), and physical 
and logical design. Business case studies and projects include 
hands-on work using an industry-standard RDBMS. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: CMIS 
320, CMSC 320, or IFSM 410.
CMSC 325 Game Design and Development (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 215 (or CMIS 242). A project-driven study of 
the theory and practice of game design and development. The 
aim is to build realistic graphical 3D worlds, animate characters, 
and add special effects to games. Discussion covers critical 
mathematical concepts and real-time game physics. Projects 
include collaborative development of interactive games.
CMSC 330 Advanced Programming Languages (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 315 (or CMSC 350). A comparative study 
of programming languages. The aim is to write safe and secure 
computer programs. Topics include the syntax and semantics 
of programming languages and run-time support required for 
various programming languages. Programming projects using 
selected languages are required.
CMSC 335 Object-Oriented and Concurrent  
Programming (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 315 (or CMSC 350). A study of object-
oriented and concurrent programming using features of Java. 
The goal is to design, implement, test, debug, and document 
complex robust programs in an object-oriented language. 
Concepts of object-oriented programming (such as composi-
tion, classification, and polymorphism) are explored. Topics 
include the principles of concurrent programming (such as task 
synchronization, race conditions, deadlock, threads, and event-
driven graphic user interface programs). Programming projects 
are implemented in Java. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: CMSC 300 or CMSC 335.
CMSC 340 Web Programming (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 115 or CMIS 141. A study of how to develop 
web applications. The objective is to understand and implement 
networking protocols, system design, and web security. Topics 
include basic web architecture, core web standards (such as 
HTTP, HTML, and CSS), client-side scripting with JavaScript, and 
server-side programming with PHP. 
CMSC 345 Software Engineering Principles  
and Techniques (3)
(Formerly CMIS 330.) Prerequisite: CMSC 115 (or CMIS 141). 
A study of software engineering from initial concept through 
design, development, testing, and maintenance of the product. 
Discussion covers software development life-cycle models. The 
goal is to analyze, customize, and document multiple processes 
to solve information technology problems. Topics include 
configuration management, quality, validation and verification, 
security, human factors, and organizational structures. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: CMIS 
330, CMIS 388A, or CMSC 345.
CMSC 405 Computer Graphics (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 325 or CMSC 315 (or CMSC 350). A hands-
on, project-based introduction to computer graphics. The goal is 
to develop projects that render graphic images and animate three-
dimensional objects. Topics include programming in OpenGL and 
transforming, viewing, and modeling 2D and 3D objects.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
223
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMSC 412 Operating Systems (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 310 or CMSC 311. A study of the fundamen-
tal principles underlying modern operating systems. The objec-
tive is to design and implement a small-scale operating system 
and design a virtual memory management system. Discussion 
covers the essential components of a typical operating system 
and the interactions among them. Topics also include methods 
of managing processes and resources in computer systems. 
A programming project that implements part of an operating 
system is required.
CMSC 415 Distributed Database Systems (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 320 or CMIS 320. An examination of the 
fundamental concepts of distributed databases. Discussion cov-
ers distributed database architecture and distributed database 
design, as well as relevant topics of big data management and 
distributed NoSQL databases. 
CMSC 420 Advanced Relational Database Concepts  
and Applications (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 320 (or CMIS 320), IFSM 410, or IFSM 411. 
A comprehensive study of the features and techniques of rela-
tional database management appropriate to the advanced end 
user, database designer, or database administrator. The goal is 
to complete hands-on work using an industry-standard enter-
prise relational database management system. Topics include 
basic database administration functions, advanced SQL and 
complex data types, stored procedures, user-defined functions, 
triggers, and data warehousing. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: CMIS 420, CMSC 420, IFSM 
420, or IFSM 498I.
CMSC 425 Mobile App Development (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 215 or CMIS 242. A study of techniques for 
designing and developing mobile applications using the Android 
operating system. Topics include mobile architecture, operating 
systems, programming languages, user interface design, and 
security and privacy issues related to mobile apps.
CMSC 427 Artificial Intelligence Foundations (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 315 (or CMSC 350) or SDEV 300. A study 
of the theoretical foundations and practical applications of 
artificial intelligence. The objective is to develop algorithms and 
systems to demonstrate intelligent behavior. Topics include 
intelligent agents, searching algorithms, knowledge representa-
tion, probability, logic, and learning.
CMSC 430 Compiler Theory and Design (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 330. An examination of the formal transla-
tion of programming languages, syntax, and semantics. The 
goal is to write programs that are constructed using program 
generators. Topics include evaluation of finite-state grammars 
and recognizers; context free parsing techniques, such as 
recursive descent, precedence, LL(K), LR(K), and SLR(K); and 
improvement and generation of machine-independent code and 
syntax-directed translation schema. Programming projects that 
implement parts of a compiler are required.
CMSC 440 Advanced Programming in Java (3)
Prerequisites: CMSC 215 (or CMIS 242) and CMSC 320 (or CMIS 
320). An exploration of advanced Java programming, using 
the Java Enterprise edition. The objective is to analyze, design, 
develop, test, deploy, and document small- to medium-scale web 
applications. Hands-on projects in Java server pages, servlets, 
and Java database connectivity are included. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CMIS 440, 
CMSC 440 or CMIS 498A.
CMSC 451 Design and Analysis of Computer  
Algorithms (3)
Prerequisites: CMSC 150 and CMSC 315 (or CMIS 350). A  
presentation of fundamental techniques for designing and 
analyzing computer algorithms. The aim is to apply big-O esti-
mates of algorithms and proof-of-correctness techniques and to 
design algorithms. Basic methods include divide-and-conquer 
techniques, search and traversal techniques, dynamic program-
ming, greedy methods, and induction. Programming projects  
are included.
CMSC 465 Image and Signal Processing (3)
Prerequisites: MATH 141 and CMSC 315 (or CMSC 350). A 
project-driven study of image and signal processing. The goal 
is to apply spectral analysis techniques to analyze time series 
data for the purpose of recognizing and classifying signals and 
to apply image segmentation, representation, and description 
techniques to recognize and classify objects. Topics include dis-
crete Fourier transforms, fast Fourier transforms, sampling and 
filtering, and image transformations and enhancements.
CMSC 486A Workplace Learning in Computer Science (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
224
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMSC 486B Workplace Learning in Computer Science (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
CMSC 495 Computer Science Capstone (3)
Prerequisite(s): Either CMSC 330 and CMSC 335, CMSC 320 
(or CMIS 320) and CMSC 345, or SDEV 425. An overview of 
computer technologies, with an emphasis on integration of con-
cepts, practical application, and critical thinking. The goal is to 
research, plan, conduct, and complete collaborative computer-
related projects in compliance with schedule deadlines. Analy-
sis covers innovative and emerging issues in computer science. 
Assignments include working in teams throughout the analysis, 
design, development, implementation, testing, and documenta-
tion phases of the projects, including periodic peer reviews.
CMSC 498 Special Topics in Computer Science (1–3)
Prerequisites: Vary according to topic. A seminar on topics in 
computer science. May be repeated to a maximum of 6 credits 
when topics differ.
Computer Studies 
Certain computer studies courses (CMST 308, CMST 310,  
CMST 311, CMST 315, CMST 320, CMST 325, CMST 330,  
CMST 331, CMST 341, and CMST 351) have higher computing 
requirements than the minimum technical requirements stated 
on p. 26. They require an Intel Core i7 processor or higher, 
with speeds of 2GHz or faster, at least 6GB of available disk 
space, and at least 16GB RAM (32GB recommended). Display 
devices should have a resolution of 1920 X 1080 or better (PCs) 
or 1440 X 900 retina display (Mac).
CMST 100B Word Processing (1)
(Not open to students who have completed CMST 303.) An 
introduction to word processing. The goal is to use word 
processing applications effectively to produce professional 
documents for business and personal communication. Top-
ics include creating, formatting, and editing word-processing 
documents. Hands-on practice with industry-standard word-
processing software is provided. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: CAPP 100B, CMST 100B, 
CAPP 103, or CMST 103.
CMST 100D Presentation Graphics (1)
(Not open to students who have completed CMST 303.) An 
introduction to the principles of presentation graphics. The 
goal is to use presentation graphics applications effectively to 
produce electronic presentations for professional and personal 
communication. Topics include planning and creating effective 
presentations. Hands-on practice with industry-standard pre-
sentation graphics software is provided. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: CAPP 100D, CMST 
100D, CAPP 103, or CMST 103.
CMST 100F Database Applications (1)
(Not open to students who have completed CMST 303.) An 
introduction to database systems, their terminology, and the 
principles of database management. The goal is to use data-
base management applications effectively to create profes-
sional databases. Topics include how best to organize, manage, 
and access stored data; how to protect databases; and how 
to extract useful information. Hands-on practice with industry-
standard database software is provided. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: CAPP 100F, CMST 
100F, CAPP 103, or CMST 103.
CMST 100G Spreadsheet Applications (1)
(Not open to students who have completed CMST 303.) An 
introduction to the use of electronic spreadsheets to analyze 
numerical data, including basic terminology, formats, and other 
applications. The goal is to use spreadsheet applications to 
produce professional electronic spreadsheets effectively for 
business and personal use. Hands-on practice with industry-
standard spreadsheet software is provided. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CAPP 100G, 
CMST 100G, CAPP 103, or CMST 103.
CMST 290 Introduction to Interactive Design (3)
An introduction to the principles, practices, techniques, and 
theories that govern the use of scripting and programming 
languages in the design and development of interactive digital 
media. The objective is to effectively use proven scripting and 
programming theory to support digital media design for print, 
web, and mobile devices. Projects involve modifying existing 
scripting languages and HTML code as well as conducting a 
usability review.
CMST 295 Fundamentals of Digital Design (3)
An overview of the principles, practices, techniques, and theo-
ries that govern web and digital design. The goal is to effectively 
follow proven design theory in creating digital design for print, 
web, and mobile devices. Topics include usability, accessibil-
ity, ethics, extended reality, and emerging technologies. Career 
paths in the web and digital design industry are analyzed.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
225
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMST 301 Digital Media and Society (3)
A survey of technological advancements in the field of digital 
media and their impact. The objective is to explain how digital 
media has transformed the communication of ideas in society 
and to make responsible choices in the creation and consump-
tion of digital media based on awareness of global, social, ethi-
cal, and legal contexts. Topics include social media, the visual 
display of information, ethics and privacy, participatory media, 
and the impact of digital media on culture.
CMST 303 Advanced Application Software (3)
Prerequisite(s): CMST 100B, CMST 100D, CMST 100G, and 
CMST 100F; or Microsoft Office Specialist (MOS) certifications 
in Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Access; or an introductory 
course in Microsoft Office. A hands-on, project-based survey of 
advanced features of office application software. The aim is to 
use advanced application features to produce documents for 
professional and personal communication. Topics include infor-
mation systems, application integration, computer hardware and 
software, storage, and networking. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: CAPP 303 or CMST 303.
CMST 308 User Experience and Interface Design (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to user experience (UX) 
and interface design (UI). An introduction to design thinking and 
the basic practices of user experience, interface, and interaction 
design. A study of a user-centric, systematic, data-driven design 
process that includes research, concept generation, prototyp-
ing, and refinement. The goal is to evaluate user interfaces and 
create a working prototype using industry-standard techniques 
guided by usability data. Topics include human-computer 
interaction, measuring and evaluating interface quality, user 
research, wireframing, prototyping, designing virtual experi-
ences, storyboarding, and career paths.
CMST 310 Fundamentals of Electronic Publishing (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to the tools, concepts, 
processes, and methods of electronic (desktop) publishing. The 
aim is to use Adobe InDesign (or another professional electronic 
publishing software program) to create electronic publica-
tions for various media formats following fundamental design 
principles. Topics include the history and evolution of publish-
ing, working with color, incorporating graphics, principles and 
elements of design, publication workflow, emerging technolo-
gies, careers in the field, ethical and legal considerations, and 
collaborative design. Students may receive credit for only one  
of the following courses: CAPP 310, CAPP 398B, or CMST 310.
CMST 311 Advanced Electronic Publishing (3)
Prerequisite: CMST 310. A hands-on, project-based study of the 
advanced concepts, tools, processes, and methods of electronic 
(desktop) publishing. The goal is to use Adobe InDesign to 
create engaging electronic publications following fundamental 
design principles for print, online, and mobile devices. Topics 
include motion and interactivity, PDF (portable document for-
mat) publishing, emerging technologies, design issues related 
to mobile devices, ethical and legal considerations, collabora-
tive work, and print- and web-ready Adobe Flash files. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses:  
CAPP 311 or CMST 311.
CMST 315 Game Design I (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to 3D video game design 
and programming fundamentals. The aim is to use an industry-
standard 3D game engine to create a game from concept to 
final product. Topics include 3D game engines, 3D game design, 
gameplay mechanics, sound effects, C# programming, project 
management, 3D physics, and user interface design. 
CMST 320 Illustration Graphics (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to illustration graphics 
using Adobe Illustrator. The goal is to apply fundamental con-
cepts of vector image composition to create professional digital 
media for delivery across multiple platforms, including print, 
web, and video, following ethical principles and legal guidelines. 
Topics include terminology, tools, theory, and processes from 
concept to completion. Discussion covers Bezier curves, shad-
ing, depth, paths, drawing tools, vector versus raster images, 
and color theory.
CMST 325 Image Editing (3)
An introduction to digital image editing using Adobe Photoshop. 
The aim is to identify established digital image editing tools, 
techniques, and best practices; create new images; and edit 
existing images. Topics include terminology, tools, theory, and 
processes from concept to completion. Discussion covers fun-
damental concepts and practical techniques, as well as ethical 
and legal issues. Emphasis is on applying these concepts and 
techniques to produce high-quality digital works for multiple 
platforms, including print, web, and other electronic media.
CMST 330 Virtual Reality Design I (3)
Prerequisite: CMST 315. A hands-on, project-based introduc-
tion to the theories, best practices, aesthetics, techniques, and 
workflows used to create immersive virtual reality. The goal is 
to develop, test, and deploy virtual reality experiences follow-
ing design theory and industry-standard best practices. Topics 
include human perception, 3D modeling, game design, design 
considerations, limitations, storytelling, mobile app develop-
ment, and 360-degree video.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
226
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMST 331 Augmented Reality Design I (3)
Prerequisite: CMST 315. A hands-on, project-based introduc-
tion to the theories, best practices, aesthetics, techniques, 
and workflows used to create immersive augmented reality 
(AR). The goal is to develop, test, and deploy augmented reality 
experiences following design theory and industry-standard best 
practices. Topics include human-computer interaction and user 
experience, design principles, 3D modeling, game design, story-
telling, and AR application development.
CMST 341 Principles of Multimedia I (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to multimedia develop-
ment. The aim is to create interactive products that integrate 
images, sound, video, and animation following sound media 
design principles for optimal display in multiple media formats 
using Adobe Animate. Topics include storyboarding, web 
design, animation, motion-tweening, project management,  
and ethical design.
CMST 351 Motion Graphics I (3)
A hands-on introduction to the basic concepts, techniques, 
and principles of digital video and motion graphics effects 
using Adobe After Effects. The objective is to describe digital 
video compositing techniques; create digital composites that 
combine video, text, digital images, and audio; and apply visual 
special effects to create professional results for use on multiple 
platforms, such as film, video, multimedia, and the web. Topics 
include techniques such as basic storyboarding, key framing, 
transformations, and rendering, as well as effects (including 
levels, curves, color correction, blur, glow, fractal noise, keying, 
masking, and cartoon effects).
CMST 355 Content Management Systems (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to website development 
using content management systems (CMS). The goal is to use 
CMSs to quickly create engaging, interactive, and dynamic web-
sites following industry-standard best practices. Topics include 
content publishing workflows, cross-browser compatibility, secur-
ity and privacy vulnerabilities, plug-ins, themes, and templates.
CMST 385 Principles of Web Design and Technology I (3)
A study of web design, tools, and technology principles. The 
goal is to plan and produce a professional website. Topics 
include internet protocols; usability; accessibility; and social, 
ethical, and legal issues related to website production. Focus is 
on HyperText Markup Language version 5 (HTML5) and cascad-
ing style sheets (CSS). Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: CAPP 385 or CMST 385.
CMST 386 Principles of Web Design and Technology II (3)
Prerequisite: CMST 385. Continuation of the study of web design, 
tools, and technology principles. The objective is to create a 
website promotion strategy, with search engine optimization, and 
produce a professional website that incorporates multimedia 
and scripting. Topics include website marketing, web analytics, 
performance, privacy, and security issues related to website 
production. Focus is on Extensible HyperText Markup Language 
(XHTML), cascading style sheets (CSS), and JavaScript. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CAPP 386 or CMST 386.
CMST 388 Fundamentals of JavaScript (3)
Prerequisite: CMST 385. A hands-on, project-based study of 
JavaScript using a structured programming approach to build 
dynamic, interactive web pages. The goal is to use client-side 
JavaScript to create interactive, cross-browser-compatible web 
pages that minimize security and privacy vulnerabilities. Topics 
include form validation, web development tools, documenta-
tion, dynamic HTML, event handling, cross-browser compat-
ibility, cookies, and security issues. Programming projects are 
included. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: CMST 388 or CMST 398J.
CMST 390 3D Modeling (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to the fundamental 
concepts, tools, and techniques used in 3D modeling. The aim 
is to use industry-standard software to design and manipulate 
models in three-dimensional space and to create 3D assets for 
virtual and augmented reality, games, animation, architecture, 
cinematics, and 3D printing. Topics include texturing, lighting, 
animation, rendering, sculpting, 3D printing, extended reality 
design, and career paths. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: CMST 390 or CMST 429. 
CMST 425 Advanced Image Editing (3)
Prerequisite: CMST 325. Continued hands-on, project-based 
study of digital image editing using Adobe Photoshop. The 
objective is to identify and apply advanced design concepts, 
adjustments, and batch-processing techniques to creating 
new images and editing existing ones. Topics include more 
advanced terminology, tools, considerations, and processes 
from concept to completion. Emphasis is on advanced con-
cepts and practical techniques to create professional images 
for print, web, and other electronic media. Discussion also cov-
ers ethical and legal issues.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
227
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CMST 486A Workplace Learning in Web  
and Digital Design (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
CMST 486B Workplace Learning in Web  
and Digital Design (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
CMST 488 Advanced JavaScript (3)
Prerequisite: CMST 388. A hands-on, project-based study of web 
application development using advanced JavaScript technolo-
gies. The aim is to create cross-browser-compatible web appli-
cations that adhere to industry standards and minimize security 
risks. Topics include JavaScript libraries, user interfaces, acces-
sibility, usability, and security. Web development projects using 
advanced JavaScript are included.
CMST 495 Web and Digital Design Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of 24 credits within the major. An 
overview of current trends, technologies, theories, and practices 
in the web and digital design fields. The aim is to integrate 
concepts, practical application, and critical thinking acquired 
through previous study and apply them to professional and 
postgraduate objectives. Analysis covers innovative and emerg-
ing issues in web and digital design. Assignments include 
industry analysis, résumé design, and portfolio creation.
Criminology/ 
Criminal Justice 
CCJS 100 Introduction to Criminal Justice (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in behavioral and 
social sciences.) An introduction to the three primary compo-
nents of the criminal justice system: law enforcement, courts, 
and corrections. The objective is to identify the components of 
the system, the practitioners within the system and their role in 
policy formation and implementation, and the major theoretical 
tenets of criminal behavior. Topics include community relations, 
the impact of criminal behavior, and the importance of research 
in the field of criminal justice.
CCJS 101 Introduction to Investigative Forensics (3)
A survey of the practical applications of forensic science. 
The aim is to learn to apply the scientific method to forensic 
evidence and distinguish between reality and popular misper-
ceptions of the roles and importance of forensic science and its 
practitioners. Discussion covers the “CSI effect,” the scientific 
method as it applies to forensic evidence, ethical practices, and 
legal aspects of the field. Topics include the definition of foren-
sic science and how it has evolved, disciplines within the field, 
ethical codes, and case law.
CCJS 105 Introduction to Criminology (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in behavioral and 
social sciences.) An exploration of the nature and causes of 
crime and criminal behavior. Topics include what we rationally 
know about crime, theoretical explanations of criminal behavior, 
and how to conduct research to explore the nature and extent of 
crime and criminal behavior.
CCJS 230 Criminal Law in Action (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100. An exploration of how criminal cases 
are handled, including factors related to criminal liability and 
how a case is charged. Focus is on the substantive elements 
of criminal law and on the historical development of criminal 
law in the United States. Topics include the basic elements of 
and defenses to criminal liability, crimes against people, crimes 
against property, and the defenses and justifications commonly 
used to negate criminal responsibility.
CCJS 234 Criminal Procedure and Evidence (3)
A study of the general principles of criminal procedure. Empha-
sis is on the history and evolution of criminal procedure in the 
United States and the fundamental components of criminal 
procedure, including privacy, reasonableness, probable cause, 
search and seizure, search warrants, interrogations, and the 
trial process. Topics include the criminal justice process and 
the connections between the law, the criminal justice process, 
criminal procedure, and evidence.
CCJS 301 Criminalistics I: The Comparative  
Disciplines (4)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100, CCJS 101, or CCJS 105. Recommended: 
CCJS 234. An intensive study of the analysis of physical 
evidence in the crime laboratory, with practical laboratory 
exercises. The objective is to apply skills expected of an entry-
level professional in the investigative forensics field that are 
necessary for the practical analysis of evidence in a criminal 
investigation. Topics include the comparative disciplines, 
including impression evidence analysis, trace evidence analysis, 
and firearms analysis.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
228
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CCJS 302 Criminalistics II: The Scientific Disciplines (4)
Prerequisite: CCJS 301. Further intensive study of the analy-
sis of physical evidence in the crime laboratory, with practical 
laboratory exercises. The goal is to apply skills expected of an 
entry-level criminalist to the practical analysis of evidence in 
a criminal investigation. Topics include the applications of the 
scientific disciplines, including bloodstain pattern analysis, 
questioned document analysis, controlled dangerous sub-
stances analysis, and DNA analysis.
CCJS 311 Intelligence-Led Policing (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100. An examination of intelligence-related 
processes as they apply to domestic law enforcement. The aim 
is to identify, collect, and assess data and process that infor-
mation into intelligence that can support strategic and tacti-
cal planning. Intelligence reports are reviewed and assessed. 
Discussion covers the legal and ethical licenses and constraints 
that provide a framework for intelligence development.
CCJS 321 Digital Forensics in the Criminal  
Justice System (3)
(For students not majoring in criminal justice; not open to stu-
dents who have completed CCJS 421; does not satisfy prereq-
uisites for other criminal justice courses.) An overview of the 
criminal justice system and the application of digital forensic 
evidence in criminal justice cases. The objective is to apply 
constitutional and case law to the search and seizure of digital 
evidence, determine the most effective and appropriate forensic 
response strategies to digital evidence, and provide effective 
courtroom testimony in a case involving digital evidence. Topics 
include crime scene procedures and the collection of digital 
evidence, procedures performed in a digital forensics lab,  
and the preparation of courtroom testimony by the digital  
forensic investigator.
CCJS 340 Law Enforcement Administration (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100. An introduction to organization and 
management in law enforcement. The objective is to communi-
cate effectively and apply research skills and management and 
administrative principles to a law enforcement agency. Topics 
include structure, process, policy and procedure, communica-
tion and authority, division of work and organizational controls, 
the human element in the organization, and informal interaction 
in the context of bureaucracy. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: CCJS 340 or CJUS 340.
CCJS 341 Criminal Investigation (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100. Recommended: CCJS 230. An explora-
tion of criminal investigation as it relates to the framework of 
the law that governs such investigations. Emphasis is on crime 
scene response, the collection and evaluation of crime scene 
evidence, the complexity of investigative interviews, and the 
application of current strategies and technology to further crimi-
nal investigations.
CCJS 342 Crime Scene Investigation (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100, CCJS 101, or CCJS 105. Recommended: 
CCJS 234. An examination of the investigation of crime scenes. 
The objective is to apply skills expected of an entry-level profes-
sional in the investigative forensics field. Topics include the 
crime scene, crime scene documentation, evidence, and post–
crime scene activities.
CCJS 345 Introduction to Security Management (3)
(Formerly CCJS 445.) Prerequisite: CCJS 100. A study of the 
history, concepts, principles, and methods of organizing and 
administering security management and loss prevention activi-
ties in industry, business, and government. The objective is to 
manage security duties, evaluate and apply risk management 
principles, and evaluate administrative and operational issues. 
Discussion covers both private and governmental risk assess-
ment and management and the protection of assets, personnel, 
and facilities. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: CCJS 345, CCJS 445, or CCJS 498G.
CCJS 350 Juvenile Delinquency (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in behavioral and 
social sciences.) Prerequisite: CCJS 100. Recommended: CCJS 
105. An examination of juvenile delinquency in relation to the 
general problem of crime. The aim is to apply theories and 
identify statutory parameters related to juvenile delinquency, 
analyze prevention measures, and assess the effectiveness of 
treatment measures. Topics include factors underlying juvenile 
delinquency, prevention of criminal acts by youths, and the 
treatment of delinquents. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: CCJS 350 or CRIM 450.
CCJS 352 Drugs and Crime (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100. An analysis of the role of criminal 
justice in controlling the use and abuse of drugs. The objective 
is to apply effective enforcement strategies, demonstrate case 
management skills, and analyze the effect of drug policy. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CCJS 352 or CJUS 352.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
229
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CCJS 360 Victimology (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in behavioral and 
social sciences.) Prerequisite: CCJS 100. Recommended: CCJS 
105. An overview of the history and theory of victimology in 
which patterns of victimization are analyzed, with emphasis on 
types of victims and of crimes. The aim is to identify and apply 
appropriate preventative measures and responses to victimiza-
tion. Discussion covers the interaction between victims of crime 
and the system of criminal justice in terms of the role of the 
victim and the services that the victim is offered. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CCJS 360  
or CRIM 360.
CCJS 380 Ethical Behavior in Criminal Justice (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100. A survey of the standards for ethical 
behavior that guide criminal justice professionals in different 
roles and responsibilities. The aim is to make ethical decisions 
based on informed personal and accepted professional stan-
dards. Rules, laws, and codes of conduct are explored as  
a foundation for discussing individual ethical responsibilities.
CCJS 390 Cybercrime and Security (3)
An examination of crimes involving the use of computers. 
Topics include federal and state laws and investigative and 
preventive methods used to secure computers. Case studies 
emphasize security. Students may receive credit for only one  
of the following courses: CCJS 390, CCJS 496, or CCJS 498C.
CCJS 416 Analytical Strategies for Law Enforcement (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100 or CCJS 105. An examination of the 
authenticity, accuracy, viability, and reliability of intelligence 
reports as they relate to the application of intelligence to public 
safety problem-solving. The goal is to evaluate intelligence 
reports to formulate plans, policies, and procedures that ensure 
effective and efficient agency operations. Focus is on develop-
ing critical-thinking and problem-solving skills through role- 
playing in a simulated environment, working with near-genuine 
intelligence reports and public safety issues. Practice is pro-
vided in analyzing the strategies and activities detailed in intelli-
gence reports, identifying and implementing responsive actions, 
and determining appropriate redistribution of such reports.
CCJS 420 Medical and Legal Investigations of Death (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 101, CCJS 100, or CCJS 105. Recommended: 
CCJS 234. An intensive look at medical and legal investigations 
into causes of death. The objective is to perform investiga-
tive functions at a death scene, determine and apply forensic 
testing, and analyze and effectively communicate investigative 
information. Topics include the difference between the medi-
cal (or pathological) and legal (or criminal) components of 
investigations into causes of death, medical and investigative 
terminology, and the impact of ethics on prosecutions and con-
victions. Case studies illustrate practical applications of various 
forms of forensic styles and parameters.
CCJS 421 Principles of Digital Analysis (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 321. A hands-on exploration of digital analy-
sis based on the overarching principles of data integrity and 
search and comparison as they relate to digital evidence. Focus 
is on the data and forensic tools and methodologies used to 
explore these overarching principles critical to digital evidence 
and analysis. The comparison and correlation of digital artifacts 
provide a solid introduction to all facets of digital analysis.
CCJS 440 Fingerprint Analysis (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 301. A comprehensive study of friction ridge 
analysis in fingerprints. Emphasis is on the practical analysis 
of evidence in a criminal investigation. The objective is to apply 
skills expected of an entry-level fingerprint professional, includ-
ing assessing surfaces for viable latent fingerprints; evaluat-
ing how to process and collect latent fingerprints; analyzing, 
comparing, evaluating, and verifying fingerprint evidence; and 
conveying findings. Topics include processing and comparison 
methodologies, historical and biological foundations of impres-
sions, and legal aspects.
CCJS 441 Firearms and Toolmarks Analysis (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 301. A comprehensive study of toolmark 
evidence, including toolmarks imparted by firearms. Discussion 
covers the practical analysis of evidence in a criminal inves-
tigation. The aim is to assess toolmarks; examine, compare, 
evaluate, and verify firearm and toolmark evidence; and convey 
findings. Topics include comparison methodologies, historical 
and mechanical foundations of toolmarks, and legal aspects. 
Focus is on developing the foundational knowledge and applied 
skills expected of an entry-level professional in the firearms and 
toolmarks field.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
230
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CCJS 461 Psychology of Criminal Behavior (3)
Prerequisite: CCJS 100. Recommended: CCJS 105. An overview 
of delinquent and criminal behavior from a developmental, 
cognitive-behavioral perspective. The aim is to apply theoretical 
perspectives (behavioral, emotional, and cognitive) to analyze 
real or hypothetical criminal scenarios; to identify the various 
factors that encourage or discourage criminal behavior; and to 
explain the use of risk assessment tools at various stages of 
the criminal justice process. Factors that influence the develop-
ment of adults and juveniles on the road to crime are exam-
ined to assess culpability for criminal behavior. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CCJS 461  
or CRIM 455.
CCJS 486A Workplace Learning in Criminal Justice (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
CCJS 486B Workplace Learning in Criminal Justice (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
CCJS 495 Criminal Justice Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: CCJS 230, CCJS 340, CCJS 341, CCJS 345, and 
CCJS 380. An integrative study of the various components of the 
American criminal justice system. The goal is to apply prin-
ciples of interagency cooperation, critical thinking, and systems 
approaches to solve practical problems in a criminal justice envi-
ronment. Topics include problem-solving, case study analysis, 
strategic planning, teamwork, and professional writing.
CCJS 497 Correctional Administration (3)
Prerequisites: CCJS 230, CCJS 340, CCJS 341, CCJS 345, and 
CCJS 380. An examination of prison administration, including 
theories of management and institutional structure and purpose. 
Objectives include the application of organizational concepts, 
leadership, and effective administrative approaches to the man-
agement of correctional institutions and offender populations. 
Emphasis is on concepts of organizational structure, communi-
cation, self-assessment, short- and long-term strategic opera-
tional planning, decision-making, and human resources.
Cybersecurity and 
Information Assurance 
CSIA 300 Cybersecurity for Leaders and Managers (3)
(Designed in part to help prepare for the EC-Council Secure 
Computer User [CSCU] certification.) Prerequisite: Any CMIS, 
CMIT, CMSC, CMST, CSIA, DATA, IFSM, or SDEV course. A 
survey of the cybersecurity principles, practices, and strategies 
required by leaders and managers to become strategic part-
ners in the establishment, management, and governance of an 
enterprise’s cybersecurity program. The aim is to develop both 
an understanding of how cybersecurity supports key business 
goals and objectives and the “soft skills” necessary for success 
in a leadership or managerial role. Topics include the funda-
mentals of cybersecurity practices and principles; enterprise IT 
governance processes and security controls; data security; the 
information life cycle; intellectual property protections; privacy 
laws and regulations; security education, training, and aware-
ness; and the need for cooperation and collaboration between 
business units and the organization’s cybersecurity program.
CSIA 310 Cybersecurity Processes and Technologies (3)
(Includes content designed to help in preparing for EC-Council 
Certified Incident Handler [ECIH] certification.) Prerequisites: 
IFSM 201 and WRTG 112 or equivalent. A study of the processes 
and technologies used to implement and manage enterprise IT 
security operations. The goal is to apply and integrate cyber- 
security concepts and best practices with the principles of IT 
operations and management and to prepare for a government- 
and industry-recognized intermediate-level cybersecurity certifica-
tion (Certified Incident Handler). Topics include the essential 
management and operational activities (acquisition, deployment, 
and operations) required to secure IT technologies and business 
operations against a wide variety of threats and attacks.
CSIA 350 Cybersecurity in Business and Industry (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the Project Management Insti-
tute Professional in Business Analysis [PMI-PBA] certification 
exam.) Prerequisite: CSIA 310. A study of the application and 
integration of cybersecurity principles, frameworks, standards, 
and best practices to the management, governance, and policy 
development processes for businesses. The aim is to apply 
business analysis principles and methods to cybersecurity 
problems in business and industry. Discussion covers the 
organization, management, and governance of cybersecurity 
for enterprise IT in business settings; risk and risk management 
practices; and development and implementation of industry-
wide cybersecurity initiatives and programs.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
231
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CSIA 360 Cybersecurity in Government Organizations (3)
Prerequisite: CSIA 350. A study of cybersecurity management 
and governance in the context of the missions, functions, and 
operations of federal, state, and municipal government agencies, 
departments, and programs. Discussion covers the policy life 
cycle and the mechanisms used by governments to formulate 
and implement laws, policies, regulations, and treaties to protect 
and defend government operations and society as a whole 
against cyberattacks and crimes, both foreign and domestic.
CSIA 413 Cybersecurity Policy, Plans, and Programs (3)
(Includes content designed to help in preparing for IAPP Certified 
Information Privacy Professional/US certification.) Prerequisite: 
CSIA 360. A study of the application of cybersecurity principles, 
frameworks, standards, and best practices to organization-level 
strategies, policies, programs, plans, procedures, and processes. 
The aim is to help prepare to take an internationally recog-
nized information privacy certification. Projects include writing 
security policies and plans, developing metrics and measures 
for information security programs, planning audits of compli-
ance practices and processes, and developing organization-level 
security policies for enterprise IT governance. Discussion covers 
principles and best practices for protecting privacy and ensuring 
compliance with laws and regulations.
CSIA 459 Evaluating Emerging Technologies (3)
Prerequisites: CMIT 320 and CSIA 350. A survey of emerging 
and leading technologies in the cybersecurity field. The aim is 
to research, evaluate, and recommend emerging technologies 
and determine secure implementation strategies for best-fit 
business solutions. Topics include evolutionary technology 
development and adoption in organizations.
CSIA 485 Cybersecurity Management and  
Policy Capstone (3)
(Includes content designed to help in preparing for the EC-
Council Certified Chief Information Security Officer [CCISO] and 
Information Security Manager [EISM] certifications.) Prerequi-
sites: CMIT 320 and CSIA 413. A study of cybersecurity manage-
ment and policy that integrates knowledge gained from previous 
coursework and experience. Focus is on developing security 
strategies, plans, policies, and processes for the protection of 
an organization’s critical information and assets. The goal is 
to enhance professional skills in cybersecurity management 
and leadership. Topics also include the ethical integration of 
cybersecurity best practices and risk management throughout 
an enterprise.
CSIA 486A Workplace Learning in Cybersecurity (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
CSIA 486B Workplace Learning in Cybersecurity (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
Data Analytics 
Courses in data analytics (except DATA 200, DATA 300,  
DATA 320, and DATA 335) have higher computing requirements 
than the minimum technical requirements stated on p. 26. 
They require an Intel Core i7 processor or higher, with speeds  
of 2GHz and at least 8GB RAM (16GB recommended).
DATA 200 Data Literacy Foundations (3)
An introduction to data and data literacy designed to enhance 
one's ability to understand and work in today’s data-driven world. 
The aim is to collect, manage, evaluate, and apply data in a criti-
cal manner and examine the role, significance, and implications 
of data, including ethical issues within a society, in organizations, 
or for individuals. Focus is on developing skills in data manipula-
tion, analysis, and visualization to generate insights from data, 
build knowledge, and make decisions. Topics include the effec-
tive use of cloud-based data storage, collaboration, and commu-
nication techniques.
DATA 230 Mathematics for Data Science (3)
Prerequisites: STAT 200 and MATH 115 (or MATH 107 and 
MATH 108) or higher. A practical introduction to the mathemati-
cal principles applied within the context of data science. The 
aim is to understand the mathematical basis of data sci-
ence and increase awareness of machine learning algorithm 
assumptions and limitations. Machine learning topics include 
linear regression, dimensionality reduction, and classification. 
Projects involve application of linear algebra, probability, vector 
calculus, and optimization to build data science solutions.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
232
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
DATA 300 Foundations of Data Science (3)
Prerequisite: STAT 200. An examination of the role of data 
science within business and society. The goal is to identify a 
problem, collect and analyze data, select the most appropriate 
analytical methodology based on the context of the business 
problem, build a model, and understand the feedback after 
model deployment. Emphasis is on the process of acquir-
ing, cleaning, exploring, analyzing, and communicating data 
obtained from variety of sources. Assignments require working 
with data in programming languages such as Python, wrangling 
data programmatically and preparing data for analysis, and 
using libraries like NumPy and Pandas.
DATA 320 Introduction to Data Analytics (3)
(Formerly DATA 220.) Prerequisite: STAT 200. A practical intro-
duction to the methodology, practices, and requirements of data 
science to ensure that data is relevant and properly manipulated 
to solve problems and address a variety of real-world projects 
and business scenarios. Focus is on the application of founda-
tional statistical concepts to describing data sets with summary 
statistics, simple data visualizations, statistical inference, and 
predictive analytics. The objective is to use data to draw conclu-
sions about the underlying patterns that drive everyday problems 
through probability, hypothesis testing, and linear model building.
DATA 335 Data Visualization (3)
Prerequisite: DATA 320. An overview of the fundamentals of 
data visualization principles in the context of business and data 
science. Practical focus is on data visualization of different data 
types, including time series and multidimensional data, and on 
creating dynamic tables, heatmaps, infographs, and dashboards. 
Hands-on projects require exploring data visually at multiple levels 
to find insights to create a compelling story and incorporating 
visual design best practices to better communicate insights to the 
intended audience, such as business stakeholders. Projects are 
selected from a wide range of content areas such as retail, mar-
keting, healthcare, government, basic sciences, and technology.
DATA 430 Foundations of Machine Learning (3)
Prerequisite: DATA 300. A hands-on introduction to machine 
learning principles and methods that can be applied to solve 
practical problems. Topics include supervised and unsupervised 
learning, especially linear regression, logistic regression, decision 
tree, naïve Bayes, and clustering analysis. Focus is on using data 
from a wide range of domains, such as healthcare, finance, mar-
keting, and government, to build predictive models for informed 
decision-making. Discussion also covers handling missing data, 
performing cross-validation to avoid overtraining, evaluating 
classifiers, and measuring precision.
DATA 440 Advanced Machine Learning (3)
Prerequisites: DATA 230 and DATA 430. A project-based study 
of advanced concepts and applications in machine learning 
(ML), such as neural networks, support vector machines (SVM), 
ensemble models, deep learning, and reinforced learning. 
Emphasis is on building predictive models for practical busi-
ness and social problems, developing complex and explainable 
predictive models, assessing classifiers, and comparing their 
performance. All stages of the machine learning life cycle are 
developed, following industry best practices for selecting meth-
ods and tools to build ML models, including Auto ML.
DATA 445 Advanced Data Science (3)
Prerequisites: DATA 335 and DATA 430. A project-based intro-
duction to the concepts, approaches, techniques, and technolo-
gies for managing and analyzing large data sets in support of 
improved decision-making. Activities include using technologies 
such as Spark, Hive, Pig, Kafka, Hadoop, HBase, Flume, Cassan-
dra, cloud analytics, container architectures, and streaming real-
time platforms. Discussion covers how to identify the kinds of 
analyses to use with big data and how to interpret the results.
DATA 450 Data Ethics (3)
Prerequisite: DATA 430. A study of ethics within the context 
of data science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence. 
Emphasis is on examining data and model bias; building 
explainable, fair, trustable, and accurate predictive modeling 
systems; and reporting responsible results. Topics include the 
technology implications of human-centered machine learning 
and artificial intelligence on decision-making in organizations 
and government and the broader impact on society, including 
multinational and global effects.
DATA 460 Artificial Intelligence Solutions (3)
(Designed to help prepare for the AWS Certified Machine Learn-
ing or Microsoft Designing and Implementing an Azure AI Solu-
tion exam.) Prerequisite: DATA 430. A hands-on, project-based 
study of artificial intelligence and machine learning solutions to 
complex problems. Topics include natural language processing, 
computer vision, and speech recognition.
DATA 495 Data Science Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: DATA 440, DATA 445, and DATA 450. A project-
based, practical application of the knowledge, technical skills, 
and critical-thinking skills acquired during previous study 
designed to showcase one’s data science expertise. Individually 
selected projects include all phases of machine learning life 
cycles and a peer-reviewed final report and presentation. Topics 
are selected from student-affiliated organizations or employers, 
special government/private agency requests, or other faculty-
approved sources in a wide range of domains, such as health-
care, financial services, marketing, sciences, and government.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
233
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Economics 
ECON 103 Economics in the Information Age (3)
A survey of basic concepts and principles in micro- and macro-
economics and how the economy has been affected by technol-
ogy. The aim is to define and explain the key terms and concepts 
in economics and determine how technology has affected 
consumers, producers, and markets, as well as economic growth 
and policy. Topics include how innovation affects labor markets, 
the value of information, and the role of technological change in 
the economy.
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics (3)
An introductory study of the macroeconomy. The objective is  
to apply select macroeconomic theories to real-world situ-
ations. Discussion covers economic growth, technological 
innovation, unemployment, inflation, and the roles of monetary 
policy and fiscal policy in determining macroeconomic perfor-
mance. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: ECON 201 or ECON 205.
ECON 203 Principles of Microeconomics (3)
An analysis of the economic principles underlying the behav-
ior of individual consumers and business firms. The goal is to 
apply select microeconomic theories to real-world situations. 
Emphasis is on market theory. Topics include the implications 
of government intervention, technological innovation, the advan-
tages and disadvantages of different market structures, and 
income distribution and poverty.
ECON 305 Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory  
and Policy (3)
Prerequisite: ECON 201. An analysis of the forces that deter-
mine a nation’s income, employment, and price levels. The aim 
is to analyze macroeconomic indicators and trends and evalu-
ate their impact. Topics include consumption, investment, infla-
tion, and governmental fiscal and monetary policy. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: ECON 
305, ECON 403, or ECON 405.
ECON 306 Intermediate Microeconomic Theory (3)
Prerequisite: ECON 203. An analysis of the principles underly-
ing the behavior of individual consumers and business firms. 
The objective is to analyze microeconomic indicators and 
trends and evaluate their impact. Discussion covers theories 
of welfare, taxation, marketing systems, and income distribu-
tion. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ECON 306 or ECON 403.
ECON 330 Business and Economics of Sustainability (3)
An introduction to natural resource and environmental econom-
ics. The objective is to apply basic economic literacy to environ-
mental issues important to business and develop appropriate 
responses to help enterprises, government agencies, or advo-
cacy organizations gain strategic advantage in the business 
environments in which they operate. Topics include benefit-cost 
analysis, valuation, market failure, pollution control, sustainable 
development, market-based environmental policy, and the eco-
nomics of renewable and nonrenewable resource management. 
Business issues related to the environment, such as recycling, 
the circular economy, environmental offsets, corporate social 
responsibility, and green certification, are explored.
ECON 430 Money and Banking (3)
Prerequisites: ECON 201 and ECON 203. An examination of 
the structure of financial institutions and their role in provid-
ing money and near money. The goal is to evaluate how the 
banking and business environments have changed, describe 
the functions and measurement of money, discuss and evaluate 
the money supply creation process, and analyze the impact of 
the Federal Reserve’s policies on both the U.S. economy and 
the economies of other nations. Topics include the composition 
of the Federal Reserve, the money supply creation process, the 
tools of monetary policy, the term structure of interest rates, the 
demand for and supply of money, and interest rate theories. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
ECON 430 or ECON 431.
ECON 440 International Economics (3)
Prerequisites: ECON 201 and ECON 203. An examination of 
international trade and finance theory and their application to 
contemporary economic issues. The aim is to use economic 
frameworks to explain international trade and financial flows 
and analyze information and data on economic policy and 
institutions. Topics include the costs and benefits of trade, 
exchange rate markets, global financial imbalances, regional 
trading blocks, and the role of international economic institu-
tions. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BEHS 440, ECON 440, or ECON 441.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
234
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Education: Teacher 
Preparation 
EDTP 500 Foundations of Teaching for Learning (6)
(May also be applied to the Master of Arts in Teaching at UMGC 
as equivalent to EDTP 600 if completed with a grade of B or 
higher.) Prerequisites: Departmental approval; completion of  
90 credits of coursework, including at least 24 credits in content 
area coursework; and a GPA of at least 2.75 in content area 
coursework. Preparation for effective entry into the classroom 
as a teacher. Topics include teaching in the contemporary 
school; human development; approaches to learning, diversity, 
and collaboration beyond the classroom; learners with excep-
tional needs; curriculum, instruction, and assessment; teach-
ing in the content area; and synthesis and application. Course 
materials and assignments focus on documents created and/
or typically utilized by school systems and incorporate current 
school district initiatives. School district personnel may partici-
pate as guests. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: EDTP 500 or EDTP 600.
EDTP 535 Adolescent Development  
and Learning Needs (6)
(May also be applied to the Master of Arts in Teaching at UMGC 
as equivalent to EDTP 635 if completed with a grade of B or 
higher.) Prerequisite: EDTP 500. Preparation to support the 
unique development of adolescents from various backgrounds, 
with varying beliefs and abilities. Learners are examined from 
the standpoint of developmental characteristics; social, cultural, 
racial, and gender affiliation; socioeconomic status; religious 
influences; learning styles; special needs; and exceptionality. 
Adolescents are also examined from biological, psychological, 
cognitive, and social perspectives; within the tapestry of their 
family and community; and through the influences of societal 
and cultural norms. Discussion covers theories and concepts 
associated with human growth and development across the 
lifespan, focusing on the typical and atypical development of 
the adolescent. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: EDTP 535 or EDTP 635.
Emergency Management 
EMGT 302 Concepts of Emergency Management (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An introduction to 
emergency management at the global, national, regional, state, 
and local levels. The objective is to identify and analyze forces 
that formulate policy; apply the principles of policy and law to 
real-world situations; and analyze emerging political, legal, and 
policy issues to improve organizational preparedness. Topics 
include preparedness, mitigation, response, and recovery. The 
history of emergency management is reviewed, and its future in 
government and industry is discussed.
EMGT 304 Emergency Response Preparedness  
and Planning (3)
Prerequisite: EMGT 302. A study of the planning process and 
format of response procedures for disasters and emergency 
events. The goal is to evaluate risk vulnerabilities and capa-
bilities, design an emergency plan, and evaluate and critically 
assess an emergency plan. Topics include risk assessment, 
modeling, hazard analysis, vulnerability assessment, and 
response capability assessment. Discussion also covers the 
evaluation of plans and the use of exercises to improve and 
implement plans.
EMGT 310 Continuity of Operations Planning  
and Implementation (3)
Prerequisite: EMGT 304. An exploration of the process for 
developing, implementing, exercising, and evaluating continu-
ity of operations for both government and industry. The goal 
is to introduce the role of continuity planning in the public and 
private sectors of our society, specifically the role continuity 
planning plays in building community resiliency and how it 
interacts with emergency management programs and planning. 
Topics include the role of continuity planning in the nation’s 
enduring constitutional government; ways that continuity 
planning makes communities and organizations more disas-
ter resilient; and the planning and operational components of 
continuity plans and programs. The roles of continuity planning 
in mitigating the effects of cyberattacks and pandemic events 
are also examined.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
235
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
EMGT 312 Social Dimensions of Disaster (3)
Prerequisite: EMGT 304. An examination of the response of 
the public and individuals to disaster-related issues such as 
disaster warnings, evacuations, relocations, civil unrest, loss of 
family and property, and recovery activities. The aim is to evalu-
ate social factors that contribute to increased risk of disaster, 
design plans and processes that consider social factors, and 
design strategies and plans to enable communication with 
diverse social groups. Emphasis is on preparing the community 
through effective programs and public information. Discussion 
also covers the impact of disasters on response organizations 
and personnel.
EMGT 314 Terrorism Issues in Emergency  
Management (3)
Prerequisite: EMGT 304. A study of the role and responsibili-
ties of the emergency manager in preparing for, responding to, 
mitigating, and recovering from situations related to terrorism. 
The objective is to devise and prepare plans, follow appropriate 
guidelines, and make use of interagency dynamics in planning 
for and responding to terrorism. Discussion covers the role of 
first responder groups and other stakeholders and links the 
protection of critical infrastructure to national, state, and  
local guidelines.
EMGT 486A Workplace Learning in Emergency 
Management (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
EMGT 486B Workplace Learning in Emergency 
Management (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
English 
ENGL 102 Composition and Literature (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirements in communications 
or arts and humanities.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. 
Further practice in writing using readings in literature. Focus 
is on academic writing forms, especially critical analysis of 
literature, through a variety of modes, such as comparison and 
contrast, classification, and causal analysis. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: ENGL 102  
or ENGL 292.
ENGL 103 Introduction to Mythology (3)
(Formerly HUMN 103.) A foundation in ancient mythology, 
focusing on Greek and Roman myths. Discussion may also 
cover Norse, Irish, Chinese, Arabic, and Hindu myths, among 
others. Emphasis is on examining various classical myths as 
expressed through plays, poems, and stories. The objective is 
to demonstrate an understanding of the differences between 
myths, legends, and other similar genres and show how classi-
cal world mythology still influences contemporary society. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
ENGL 103 or HUMN 103.
ENGL 240 Introduction to Fiction, Poetry, and Drama (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An introduction to fiction, 
poetry, and drama, with an emphasis on developing critical 
reading and writing skills. The objective is to identify and define 
elements of literature and literary genres, analyze literary texts 
using principles of close reading, and demonstrate skill in aca-
demic writing. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: ENGL 240 or ENGL 340.
ENGL 250 Introduction to Women’s Literature (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112. Recommended: ENGL 102. An over-
view of multiple forms of writings by and about women from 
various periods and cultures. The aim is to read critically,  
understand diverse perspectives, and write effectively about 
women’s literature.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
236
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ENGL 281 Standard English Grammar (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications 
but is not a writing course.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equiva-
lent. An overview of standard edited English, a standard central 
to academic and professional communications. The aim is to 
write clear, effective prose consistent with the writer’s goals. 
Topics include applying advanced grammatical and linguistic 
descriptions and prescriptions and attending to the needs of 
diverse audiences while making writing and editing decisions. 
Tasks focus on parts of speech, sentence patterns, and sen-
tence transformations. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: ENGL 281, ENGL 281X, or WRTG 288.
ENGL 294 Introduction to Creative Writing (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112. An introductory survey and practi-
cal study of key aspects of literary writing. The objective is to 
produce original creative writing and to critique, revise, and edit 
that writing from a writer’s perspective. Constructive, collab-
orative processes are employed to better understand the art 
and craft of creative writing. Topics may include poetry, fiction, 
creative nonfiction, or drama.
ENGL 303 Critical Approaches to Literature (3)
(Designed as a foundation for other upper-level literature 
courses.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A study of the 
techniques of literary criticism, emphasizing close reading, criti-
cal thinking, and critical writing. The goal is to apply a variety of 
theoretical approaches to literature, analyze texts, and create 
professional written communications.
ENGL 310 Renaissance Literature (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A study of major British 
authors and literary works from the English Renaissance period. 
The goal is to gain historical perspective and discern contempo-
rary relevance by exploring social and cultural contexts.
ENGL 311 The Long 18th-Century British Literature (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A study of major British 
authors and literary works from the period known as the long 
18th century, roughly from Restoration through the Age of 
Sensibility (1660–1830s). The goal is to gain historical perspec-
tive and discern contemporary relevance by exploring social and 
cultural contexts.
ENGL 312 19th-Century British Literature (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A study of major British 
authors and literary works from the historical eras known as the 
Romantic Age and Victorian Age. The goal is to gain historical 
perspective and discern contemporary relevance by exploring 
social and cultural contexts.
ENGL 363 African American Authors from  
the Colonial Era to 1900 (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An examination of African 
American authors before 1900, including Phillis Wheatley,  
Frances Harper, Maria W. Stewart, David Walker, Frederick  
Douglass, William Wells Brown, Charles Chesnutt, and Paul  
Laurence Dunbar. The goal is to research historical issues; 
integrate findings into discussion; and articulate, develop, and 
advance a persuasive argument in written form.
ENGL 364 African American Authors from 1900  
to the Present (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An examination of early 
20th-century to early 21st-century African American authors, 
including James Weldon Johnson, Zora Neale Hurston, Richard 
Wright, James Baldwin, Ann Petry, Helene Johnson, Dorothy 
West, and Langston Hughes. The goal is to research histori-
cal issues; integrate findings into discussion; and articulate, 
develop, and advance a persuasive argument in written form. 
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ENGL 364 or HUMN 364.
ENGL 381 Special Topics in Creative Writing (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. Recommended: ENGL 
294 or other creative writing course. A study of special cre-
ative writing topics. The goal is to develop creative writing 
skills within the scope of the special topic. Focus may be on 
a specific format (such as the novella, novel, or screenplay) or 
genre (such as mystery, horror, or teen fiction; travel writing; or 
epic poetry). May be repeated to a maximum of 6 credits when 
topics differ.
ENGL 384 Advanced Grammar and Style (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications 
but is not a writing course.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equiva-
lent. An examination of the basic units of grammatical descrip-
tions, the nature of grammatical categories and structure, the 
methods and reasons for creating and using those structures, 
and the application of grammatical concepts to editorial and 
written style. The focus is on creating dynamic texts that con-
vey complex subject matter to diverse audiences. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: ENGL 384  
or WRTG 388.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
237
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ENGL 386 History of the English Language (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An examination of the 
development and usage of the English language. The objective 
is to explore various texts and research tools to examine the 
linguistic heritage and continuing evolution of English. Discus-
sion traces the history of English from its origins and examines 
contemporary issues and controversies.
ENGL 389 Special Topics in English Literature (1–3)
An in-depth introduction to literary works written by a specific 
author or authors, representative of a literary movement or  
produced in a specific time or place. Assignments include  
advanced reading and research. Students may receive credit  
for a given topic in either ENGL 289 or ENGL 389 only once.
ENGL 406 Shakespeare Studies (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An intensive study of 
Shakespeare’s work and its continuing relevance with refer-
ence to historically specific social and cultural contexts. The 
objective is to evaluate and synthesize source materials, apply 
critical theory, and demonstrate understanding of dramatic text. 
Histories, comedies, tragedies, romances, and sonnets may be 
examined. Students may receive credit for only one of the fol-
lowing courses: ENGL 406 or HUMN 440.
ENGL 418 Major British Writers Before 1800 (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A comprehensive and 
intensive study of one or two British writers from the period 
before 1800. The aim is to apply critical reading and thinking 
skills to analyze and interpret major British works before 1800 
from various perspectives (social, historical, political, intellec-
tual, and biographical). Authors studied may include Chaucer, 
Spenser, Marlowe, Jonson, Milton, Defoe, Richardson, Fielding, 
Pope, Swift, or Johnson. May be repeated to a maximum of  
6 credits when topics differ.
ENGL 430 Early American Literature (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A study of early Ameri-
can literature. The aim is to examine literary periods, move-
ments, and styles; interpret literature as a reflection of national 
and world events; recognize the differences among types of 
American literary works; and apply critical methodology. Top-
ics include Indigenous narratives, revolution and government, 
American romanticism, slavery, women’s rights, the Civil War 
and Reconstruction, and naturalism and realism.
ENGL 433 Modern American Literature (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A study of modernist 
American fiction, poetry, nonfiction, and drama. The goal is to 
interpret and analyze literature in its social and historical con-
texts. Topics include the literary movement of modernism and 
application of critical theory.
ENGL 439 Major American Writers (1–3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A study of works by 
selected American authors from the colonial period to the pres-
ent. The goal is to understand the place these authors and their 
works hold in the canon of American literature. Emphasis is on 
the impact of historical and social events, as well as biographi-
cal influences, on the literature. May be repeated to a maximum 
of 6 credits when topics differ.
ENGL 441 Postmodern American Literature:  
1945 to 1999 (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A comprehensive study 
of literature in America from 1945 to the end of the 20th cen-
tury. The objective is to interpret American literature as a reflec-
tion of national and world events, recognize the differences 
among types of American literary works, and apply critical 
methodology. Topics include the American Dream; war; fear and 
paranoia; rebellion and counterculture; civil rights, feminist, and 
gay movements; postmodernism; and multiculturalism.
ENGL 459 Contemporary Global Literatures (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112. An advanced examination of contem-
porary literary texts written by diverse writers that addresses 
the connections between geographical regions, history, and 
social justice. Literature studied will be of varied genres, includ-
ing poetry, fiction, and memoir, with some in multimedia form. 
Canonical and emerging writers are studied to understand 
established and current discourse in the field. The goal is to 
demonstrate critical, interpretative, and analytical skills in read-
ing and writing as well as apply contemporary theory. Writers 
covered may vary from term to term.
ENGL 495 English Literature Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: ENGL 240, ENGL 303, and at least 9 additional 
credits of upper-level ENGL courses. A synthesis and application 
of knowledge and skills developed by previous study in the disci-
pline. The goal is to refine skills and explore ways that they may 
be applied after graduation. Focus is on reviewing and revising 
previously written papers and/or projects to create a comprehen-
sive portfolio. Assignments include the creation of the portfolio 
and writing original papers on one’s professional postgraduate 
objectives and the current status of the discipline.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
238
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Environmental Health  
and Safety 
ENHS 300 Environmental Systems (3)
Prerequisite: CHEM 297. An introduction to environmental 
systems and the impact of human activities on the environment. 
The goal is to explore the Earth’s systems, including the bio-
sphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere, and recognize 
the complex interconnections of natural and human systems to 
gain a deeper understanding of human drivers of environmental 
change and environmental health and safety concerns. Topics 
include systems thinking, the impact of resource development 
and use, and general scientific principles and concepts related  
to environmental systems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles, flow  
of energy, biodiversity, soil, water, and air). Students may  
receive credit for only one of the following courses: ENHS 300  
or ENMT 301.
ENHS 305 Environmental Health and Safety  
Regulations (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: ENHS 300. An analysis of the 
development, use, and implementation of constitutional and 
administrative law in environmental health and safety manage-
ment. The goal is to practice information literacy skills to locate 
applicable policies, laws, and regulations and to apply knowledge 
of process and regulatory communication systems for effective 
environmental health and safety management. The emphasis 
is on federal legislation and the use of the Federal Register and 
Code of Federal Regulations. Discussion explores the relationship 
between regulations and public policy at local, state, and federal 
levels. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ENHS 305, ENMT 303, or ENMT 493. 
ENHS 310 Hazardous Substances and Toxicology (3)
An exploration of hazardous substances and their effects on 
human health and the environment. The aim is to examine 
hazards and risk factors to determine mechanisms leading to 
injury and damaging health outcomes. Topics include hazard 
identification and communication, fundamentals of toxicol-
ogy, task safety analysis, and occupational and environmental 
exposure science. 
ENHS 315 Risk Assessment in Environmental Health  
and Safety (3)
An examination of the general concepts of risk assessment as 
applied to environmental health and safety practice. The aim 
is to incorporate best practices for risk assessment, analysis, 
and mitigation recommendations for effective management of 
change. Topics include ecological and human risk assessment; 
risk perception; risk transfer options; and identification of meth-
ods, databases, and tools to characterize risk. 
ENHS 320 Incident Response and Investigation (3)
An introduction to incident planning, response, investigation, 
analysis, and management. The objective is to synthesize data 
and evidence to develop recommendations for prevention or 
mitigation of future incidents. Topics include the incident com-
mand system, hazardous substances emergency response, 
incident analysis and investigation methods, and workplace 
violence prevention.
ENHS 325 Fire Prevention and Protection (3)
An overview of fire prevention and protection as applied to 
environmental health and safety. The objective is to implement 
evidence-based practices and strategies to address physical 
and chemical hazards that may result in a fire or explosion 
event. Topics include fire science, chemical and electrical haz-
ards, detection and suppression systems, hot work, life safety, 
and chemical process safety.
ENHS 330 Safety and Security Management (3)
Prerequisite: ENHS 305. A detailed exploration of safety  
and security management systems applied to the occupational 
environment. The aim is to implement evidence-based work-
place interventions to clarify issues and contributing factors 
and to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions. Topics 
include hazard control methods, performance indicators,  
construction safety practices, fleet safety, inspections and 
audits, change management, safety culture, and voluntary  
consensus standards. 
ENHS 335 Occupational Health and Industrial Hygiene (3)
Prerequisite: ENHS 310. An investigation of work-related impacts 
on human health and the environment. The goal is to anticipate, 
recognize, evaluate, control, and confirm the effectiveness of 
controls for occupational health hazards and risk factors through 
the practice of industrial/occupational hygiene. Topics include 
exposure assessment and management, indoor environmental 
quality, ventilation, return-to-work programs, susceptible worker 
protection, and worker privacy. 
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
239
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ENHS 340 Environmental Technology and Control (3)
Prerequisite: ENHS 300. An introduction to technology for envi-
ronmental health and safety management, control, and remedia-
tion. The objective is to apply appropriate technological solutions 
to air, land, and water to prevent, treat, detect, and remediate pol-
lution. Discussion covers existing, modified, new, and emerging 
technologies, as well as factors in making technology application 
decisions for waste removal, treatment, and disposal. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: ENHS 
340 or ENMT 340. 
ENHS 350 Introduction to Geographic  
Information Systems (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: ENHS 300. An introduction to the 
basic concepts of geographic information systems (GIS). The 
aim is to apply critical-thinking and problem-solving skills to 
address current environmental and watershed challenges using 
GIS software and develop skills in framing problems effectively 
and ethically. Activities include selecting data; creating and 
building databases; editing, analyzing, and presenting data in 
a spatial context; and interpreting and communicating results. 
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ENHS 350 or ENMT 307.
ENHS 360 Introduction to Watershed Management (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: ENHS 300. A comprehensive 
examination of watershed management with a focus on design 
practices. The aim is to apply critical thinking and build the 
professional skills in science, management practice, regulatory 
processes, and stakeholder engagement required to imple-
ment watershed and stormwater management in the United 
States. Topics include watershed characterization, hydrologic 
processes, land use impacts on watersheds, water quality and 
quantity, and the design of structural and nonstructural best 
management practices. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: ENHS 360 or ENMT 360.
ENHS 400 Ergonomics and Human Factors (3)
A foundation in ergonomics, human factors, and best practices 
for worker training. The aim is to apply basic principles of 
anthropometry, human factors engineering, biomechanics, and 
work practice controls to prevent injuries and illnesses. Topics 
include descriptive statistics, qualitative and quantitative data 
analysis, assessment of worker competency and fitness for 
duty, and adult learning theory. Assignments include performing 
a needs and gap analysis for worker learning and development. 
ENHS 405 Pollution Prevention Strategies (3)
Prerequisite: ENHS 300. An overview of alternative environmen-
tal strategies to prevent, reduce, and minimize pollution. The 
goal is to integrate knowledge about environmental manage-
ment systems and regulations. Topics include source reduction, 
conservation, material substitution, process modifications, 
quality assurance/control, water minimization, and economic 
analysis for regulatory compliance related to these strate-
gies. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ENHS 405 or ENMT 405. 
ENHS 495 Environmental Health and Safety Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of 30 credits of ENHS courses, includ-
ing ENHS 305, ENHS 330, and ENHS 340. A project-driven study 
of core competencies in environmental health and safety profes-
sional practice. The objective is to propose, conduct, and report 
on an applied project activity to demonstrate depth of technical 
knowledge in at least one hazard or risk factor area. Topics 
include legal liability, evidence-based professional and ethical 
practice, leadership, communication and consultation, collabora-
tive project management, and conflict management. 
Experiential Learning 
EXCL 301 Prior Learning Portfolio (3)
(Students should visit umgc.edu/priorlearning or contact  
priorlearning@umgc.edu for complete requirements.) Prereq-
uisite: Formal admission to the program. Instruction in the 
preparation of a portfolio documenting college-level learning 
gained through life experiences. The aim is to translate prior life 
experiences into college credit by developing a portfolio that 
documents and presents learning specific to targeted courses. 
Faculty evaluators assess completed portfolios to recommend 
credit award.
EXCL X001 Supplement to Prior Learning Portfolio (0) 
(Students should visit umgc.edu/priorlearning or contact  
priorlearning@umgc.edu for complete requirements.) Prerequi-
site: EXCL 301. An opportunity to prepare additional portfolios 
for courses not previously targeted. The aim is to translate prior 
life experiences into college credit by developing a portfolio that 
documents and presents learning specific to targeted courses. 
Faculty evaluators assess completed portfolios to recommend 
credit award.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
240
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Finance 
FINC 321 Fundamentals of Building Wealth (3)
(Formerly BMGT 342. For students majoring in both business 
and nonbusiness disciplines.) A practical overview of personal 
finance management and wealth creation that blends financial 
theory and application. The goal is to develop personal financial 
management skills (e.g., budgeting income and expenditures 
and planning for financial security and retirement) and under-
stand elements of the U.S. financial structure (including savings 
and investment alternatives, financing and credit sources, and 
the role of insurance in protecting income and assets). These 
skills are utilized in the development of a personal financial 
plan. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 342, BMGT 388F, BMGT 388N, FINC 321,  
or FINC 322.
FINC 328 Small Business Finance (3)
A project-driven study of small business and entrepreneurial 
finance that emphasizes the financial knowledge and tools 
needed to develop a successful venture from start-up through 
growth and maturity. The goal is to identify, assess, and explain 
the key decision-making processes required of a small busi-
ness entrepreneur or financial manager. Topics include financial 
statement analysis, capital acquisition, legal and regulatory 
compliance, budgeting, forecasting, and client and vendor 
relationships. Projects include creation of a financial plan and 
completion of a loan application. Discussion also covers con-
temporary issues related to finance.
FINC 330 Business Finance (3)
Prerequisites: ACCT 221 and STAT 200. An overview of the 
theory, principles, and practices of financial management in a 
business environment. Topics include financial analysis and 
financial risk, characteristics and valuations of securities, capi-
tal investment analysis and decision-making, the capital struc-
ture of the firm, financial leverage, and international finance. 
The aim is to examine financial information, identify issues and 
solve business problems, and make sound business decisions. 
Emphasis is on the application of financial theory and meth-
ods for solving the problems of financial policy that managers 
face. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 340, FINC 330, MGMT 398D, or TMGT 320.
FINC 331 Finance for the Nonfinancial Manager (3)
Development of the financial skills needed by functional 
experts in human resources, marketing, production, and general 
management. The objective is to interpret finance and account-
ing documents and apply that information to sound business 
decision-making. Topics include financial statements and 
forecasting, capital budgeting, project evaluation, working capi-
tal management, stocks and bonds, time value of money, and 
international financial management. Emphasis is on practical 
applications to facilitate informed discussions with business 
professionals for financial decision-making. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 341 
or FINC 331.
FINC 335 Fintech, Financial Institutions, and Markets (3)
An overview of the interplay of financial markets, financial insti-
tutions, and technology. Topics include the characteristics and 
roles of financial markets and institutions. Focus is on evaluat-
ing what drives the term structure of interest rates. The aim is 
to be able to discuss how emerging technologies are used in 
the financial services industry and how they affect delivery of 
financial products and services, such as insurance, investment 
advising, and wealth management. 
FINC 340 Investments (3)
(Formerly BMGT 343.) Prerequisites: FINC 330 and FINC 335. 
An introduction to financial investments and portfolio man-
agement. The goal is to evaluate and critically analyze asset 
selection and allocation and perform basic portfolio manage-
ment activities. Topics include types of securities and securities 
markets; investment risks, returns, and constraints; portfolio 
policies and management; and institutional investment policies. 
Theories, practices, and real-world examples are examined and 
analyzed. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: BMGT 343 or FINC 340.
FINC 351 Risk Management (3)
(Formerly BMGT 346.) A study focused on recognizing and 
evaluating pure risk facing organizations. The aim is to identify 
risks to cost control and develop risk management strate-
gies. Discussion covers guides for risk-management decisions 
concerning the retention, control, and transfer of risk (including 
insurance). Students may receive credit for only one of the fol-
lowing courses: BMGT 346 or FINC 351.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
241
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
FINC 352 Life and Health Insurance (3)
A study of the tools and principles of life and health insurance 
in financial planning for businesses and individuals. The goal 
is to assess personal needs in order to determine which types 
of life and health insurance plans fit best. Topics include pen-
sion planning strategies, such as deferred-compensation and 
profit-sharing plans; use of trusts in business and in planning 
individual estates; and comprehensive analysis of the effects of 
income taxes, estate taxes, and gift taxes on life insurance and 
estate planning. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: BMGT 347 or FINC 352.
FINC 355 Retirement and Estate Planning (3)
(Content aligned with the Certified Financial Planner [CFP] 
curriculum.) A comprehensive study of retirement and estate 
planning techniques for individuals, families, and businesses. 
The aim is to evaluate retirement plans, analyze regulatory 
considerations of retirement planning, and apply estate plan-
ning techniques for businesses and families. Topics include 
retirement planning and estate planning, as well as regulations 
relevant to the financial services industry. Discussion covers 
processes of retirement planning (retirement need, investments, 
taxes, Social Security, Medicare, qualified versus nonqualified 
plans, and tax-advantage plans) and estate planning (wills, 
trusts, asset protection, and life insurance).
FINC 421 Financial Analysis (3)
(For students with general business interests, as well as those 
majoring or minoring in accounting or finance.) Prerequisite: 
FINC 340. An analysis and interpretation of financial statements 
directed at the decision-making needs of managers, stockhold-
ers, and creditors. The aim is to analyze and interpret financial 
information, apply financial information directly to valuation 
models, and evaluate growth strategies to maximize company 
value. Topics include assessment of business performance, pro-
jection of financial requirements, analysis of capital investment 
decisions and financing choices, risk assessment, and valua-
tion. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 498Q or FINC 421.
FINC 430 Financial Management (3)
Prerequisite: FINC 340. A study of financial management. The 
objective is to apply financial principles and concepts to assess 
and solve financial problems and make financial and corporate 
policy at the executive level. Topics include assessments of the 
financial health of the organization, company valuation, cost of 
capital, risk analysis, investment decisions, and financial sys-
tems and capital markets. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: BMGT 440 or FINC 430.
FINC 440 Security Analysis and Valuation (3)
Prerequisites: FINC 340. A comprehensive and quantitative 
examination of financial investments and portfolio manage-
ment. The aim is to quantitatively evaluate and value assets, 
critically analyze asset selection and allocation, and apply finan-
cial statistics and other evaluation methods to perform basic 
portfolio management activities and functions. Topics include 
the analysis, valuation, and selection of securities; investment 
risks, returns, and constraints; portfolio policies and manage-
ment; institutional investment policies; and the operation and 
efficiency of financial markets. Theory, practice, and real-world 
examples are analyzed to value financial assets and compare 
alternatives. Students may receive credit for only one of the  
following courses: BMGT 443 or FINC 440.
FINC 450 Commercial Bank Management (3)
Prerequisites: FINC 330 and FINC 340. An analysis of commer-
cial bank management. The aim is to examine how the chang-
ing commercial banking environment has affected profitability 
and evaluate bank business strategies. Discussion covers the 
loan function and the management of liquidity reserves, invest-
ments for income, and sources of funds. The objectives, func-
tions, policies, organization, structure, services, and regulations 
of banks are considered. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: BMGT 445 or FINC 450.
FINC 460 International Finance (3)
Prerequisite: FINC 340. An analysis and discussion of financial 
management issues for the multinational enterprise. The aim 
is to use financial and economic strategies in quantitative 
decision-making. Topics include the organization and func-
tions of the foreign exchange market and international capital 
markets; financing foreign trade; and identifying, analyzing, 
and evaluating the globalization strategies of the multinational 
enterprise. Students may receive credit for only one of the fol-
lowing courses: BMGT 446 or FINC 460.
FINC 486A Workplace Learning in Finance (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
FINC 486B Workplace Learning in Finance (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
242
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
FINC 490 Financial Plan Development (3)
(Content aligned with the Certified Financial Planner [CFP] 
curriculum.) Prerequisites: ACCT 323, FINC 321, FINC 340, FINC 
352, and FINC 355. A thorough review of financial planning prin-
ciples and applications, based on case studies. The objective is 
to gather and analyze data, evaluate the impact of governmen-
tal regulations and economic changes, and effectively commu-
nicate a comprehensive financial plan to clients. Topics include 
taxes, estates, asset protection, debt, credit, investments, insur-
ance, economic theories, the financial planning process, ethics, 
and risk.
FINC 495 Contemporary Issues in Finance Practice (3)
(Intended as a final, capstone course to be taken in a student’s 
last 15 credits.) Prerequisites: FINC 330 and FINC 340. A study 
of finance that integrates knowledge gained through previ-
ous coursework and experience and builds on that conceptual 
foundation through integrative analysis, academic research, 
practical application, and critical thinking. The objective is to 
apply financial theories and contemporary financial practices 
to business issues. Emerging issues in finance and business 
are considered. Individual and group case studies and research 
papers are used to integrate key financial knowledge in the 
areas of financial analysis, investments, business valuation, 
risk, and international finance. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BMGT 495 or FINC 495.
Fire Science 
FSCN 302 Fire and Emergency Services  
Administration (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A presentation of modern 
management and planning techniques that apply to organizing 
a fire department. The objective is to apply management con-
cepts to fire service administration and analyze the community 
approach to risk reduction. Discussion covers procedures for 
evaluation and control of budgeting, personnel, communica-
tions, and planning. Topics also include the traditional and 
evolving roles of the fire department in protection, prevention, 
and community service.
FSCN 304 Personnel Management for Fire  
and Emergency Services (3)
Prerequisite: FSCN 302. An examination of personnel practices, 
including management procedures, collective bargaining, bind-
ing arbitration, and applicable legislative and administrative  
procedures. The aim is to manage emergency service person-
nel; develop, communicate, and implement organizational 
goals and objectives; and lead personnel in compliance with 
regulations and within an ethical framework. Topics include 
promotion, personnel development, career and incentive sys-
tems, validation of physical requirements, and managerial and 
supervisory procedures.
FSCN 305 Fire Prevention Organization  
and Management (3)
Prerequisite: FSCN 302. An examination of prevention as the pri-
mary community-based strategy for fire protection. The objec-
tive is to design, implement, and manage programs addressing 
community risks; administer prevention programs; and influ-
ence change and development of legislation, regulation, and pol-
icy. Emphasis is on applying principles to anticipate problems 
and develop strategies for fire prevention. Topics include com-
munity risk reduction, codes and standards, inspections and 
plans review, incident investigation, fire-prevention research, 
and the relationship of master planning to fire prevention. The 
cultural, economic, governmental, nongovernmental, and depart-
mental influences on fire prevention are also explored.
FSCN 413 Community Risk Reduction for the Fire  
and Emergency Services (3)
Prerequisites: FSCN 304 and FSCN 305. An examination of the 
ethical, sociological, organizational, political, and legal compo-
nents of community risk reduction. The goal is to analyze envi-
ronments and design and develop a community risk reduction 
plan and implement that plan. A framework for understanding 
these issues and a methodology for developing a comprehen-
sive community risk reduction plan are provided.
FSCN 416 Emergency Services Training and Education (3)
Prerequisites: FSCN 304 and FSCN 305. An examination of 
the management and administration of training and education 
in fire and emergency services. The objective is to manage 
and administer development programs, integrate concepts in 
training programs, and analyze and assess programs. Discus-
sion explores how higher education/training contributes to 
the professional development of fire-service personnel. Topics 
include the many systems of training and education available 
and professional development on both individual and organiza-
tional levels. Focus is on safety, especially understanding and 
preventing training deaths and injuries.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
243
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
French 
FREN 111 Elementary French I (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
French; assumes no prior knowledge of French. Students with 
prior experience with the French language should take a place-
ment test to assess appropriate level.) An introduction to the 
French language. The objective is to listen to, speak, read, and 
write elementary French in concrete, real-life situations and in 
culturally appropriate ways. Practice in pronunciation is provided. 
The diverse language and culture of the French-speaking world 
is also explored. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: FREN 101 or FREN 111.
FREN 112 Elementary French II (3)
(Not open to native speakers of French.) Prerequisite: FREN 111 
or appropriate score on a placement test. A continued introduc-
tion to the French language. The objective is to listen to, speak, 
read, and write French in concrete, real-life situations related to 
oneself and others in culturally appropriate ways. Practice in 
speaking and listening is provided. The diverse language and 
culture of the French-speaking world is explored. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: FREN 102  
or FREN 112.
Geography 
GEOG 100 Introduction to Geography (3)
An exploration of how geography is used to analyze, understand, 
and interpret our world. The goal is to use an interdisciplinary 
approach and a spatial perspective to analyze complex social 
issues. Emphasis is on using geospatial tools and concepts to 
investigate the interconnection of human and physical systems 
and their relationship to major global problems and prospects. 
Topics include globalization, climate change, population dynam-
ics, cultural diversity, and ecological conservation.
Geology 
GEOL 100 Physical Geology (3)
An introductory study of geology, encompassing the Earth, the 
materials that constitute its makeup, the structure of those 
materials, and the processes acting on them. The goal is to 
understand geological principles and how humans affect 
geological processes. Topics include the rocks and minerals 
composing Earth, the movement within Earth, and its surface 
features and the agents that form them and our environment. 
Discussion also covers energy and mineral resources. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: GEOL 
100 or GEOL 101.
German 
GERM 111 Elementary German I (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
German; assumes no prior knowledge of German. Students with 
prior experience with the German language should take a place-
ment test to assess appropriate level.) An introduction to the 
German language. The objective is to communicate in German 
in some concrete, real-life situations using culturally appropri-
ate language. Aspects of German life and culture are explored 
through the German language. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: GERM 101 or GERM 111.
GERM 112 Elementary German II (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
German.) Prerequisite: GERM 111 or appropriate score on a 
placement test. A continued introduction to spoken and written 
German. The goal is to communicate in German in concrete, 
real-life situations relating to oneself and others. German cul-
ture and language are explored. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: GERM 102 or GERM 112.
GERM 211 Intermediate German I (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. Prerequisite: GERM 112 or appropri-
ate score on a placement test. Further development of listen-
ing, speaking, reading, and writing skills in German. The aim 
is to communicate in German in real-life situations and social 
contexts in culturally appropriate ways. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: GERM 114, GERM 
201, or GERM 211.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
244
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
GERM 212 Intermediate German II (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. Prerequisite: GERM 211 or appropri-
ate score on a placement test. Further development of listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing skills in German. The objective  
is to interact effectively with German-speaking individuals in  
a variety of personal settings and on issues of topical interest  
in culturally appropriate ways. Students may receive credit  
for only one of the following courses: GERM 115, GERM 202,  
or GERM 212.
GERM 311 Advanced German I (3)
Prerequisite: GERM 212 or appropriate score on a placement test. 
An in-depth review and expansion of German language commu-
nication skills. The aim is to express opinions and use narration 
and description in a variety of personal and professional contexts. 
Focus is on improving linguistic proficiency while increasing cul-
tural awareness. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: GERM 301 or GERM 311.
GERM 314 Modern German-Speaking Cultures (3)
Prerequisite: GERM 212 or appropriate score on a placement 
test. An overview of contemporary life and culture in the  
German-speaking world, taught entirely in German. The objec-
tive is to demonstrate intercultural communication skills, recog-
nize aspects of German-speaking cultures and their significance 
to global society, and employ strategies to enhance language 
development and cultural awareness. Discussion covers the 
social, historical, and political experience of the German- 
speaking people.
Gerontology 
GERO 100 Contemporary Issues in Aging (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in the behavioral and 
social sciences.) A multidisciplinary exploration of aging in the 
21st century, with an emphasis on the policies, evidence-based 
approaches, and attitudes that promote healthful aging. Activi-
ties include skill-building exercises. The objective is to locate and 
read scholarly sources, create effective presentations in different 
modalities, and communicate with and on behalf of older people.
GERO 301 Service/Program Management (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in behavioral and 
social sciences.) Recommended: GERO 100. An exploration 
and analysis of the managerial aspects of providing health and 
human services in the field of gerontology through an integrated 
delivery system. The aim is to integrate concepts, strategies, and 
best practices for the management of health and human serv-
ices. Topics include planning, strategic management, marketing, 
financing, legal issues, and capacity building.
GERO 302 Health and Aging (3)
Recommended: GERO 100. An exploration of the physiological 
processes of aging that covers normal aging and chronic illness. 
The goal is to distinguish normal aging from disease and evalu-
ate factors that affect the health of older adults. Topics include 
biological processes and theories of aging, bodily changes nor-
mally associated with aging, long-term and healthcare systems, 
and related medical terminology. Review also covers substance 
abuse; environmental factors affecting aging; and ways of pro-
moting health, preventing disease, and assessing health risks.
GERO 306 Programs, Services, and Policies (3)
Recommended: GERO 100 and GERO 302. An overview of the 
impact of policy related to older adults on U.S. society. The aim 
is to examine the role of legislative mandates on older adults  
at both societal and individual levels. Topics include Social 
Security, Medicare, and the Older Americans Act. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: GERO 304  
or GERO 306.
GERO 311 Gender and Aging (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in behavioral and 
social sciences.) Recommended: GERO 100. An analysis and 
discussion of issues related to gender and the aging process. 
The goal is to evaluate and challenge negative, socially con-
structed assumptions associated with gender and aging, as well 
as examine gender-relevant issues in health and well-being after 
midlife. Discussion covers life transitions, socioeconomic status, 
culture, family and social relationships, ageism, and sexuality 
and health as each relates to gender. The impact of public policy 
and services on gender and aging is also addressed. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: GERO 
311 or GERO 497E.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
245
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
GERO 320 Psychosocial Aspects of Aging (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in behavioral and 
social sciences.) Recommended: GERO 100. An advanced 
multidisciplinary examination of the psychosocial forces that 
affect the aging process. Aspects of aging are analyzed from a 
number of theoretical perspectives found in psychology, sociol-
ogy, and social gerontology. The goal is to articulate the impact 
of biological, sociocultural, and life cycle forces on psychological 
and social well-being in post-midlife. Topics include normative 
and atypical psychological and social functioning in post-midlife; 
the social construction of aging; and the impact of aging, age-
ism, and longevity on social structures, such as the family, work, 
retirement, and healthcare. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: GERO 220, GERO 320, or PSYC 357.
GERO 338 Health Promotion in Older Adults (3)
Recommended: GERO 100. A project-based exploration of health 
promotion for an aging population. The objective is to articulate 
different models of health promotion for older adults and design 
a health promotion campaign.
GERO 342 Long-Term Care Administration (3)
Recommended: GERO 100. An overview of the administrative 
and operational issues of long-term care facilities. The aim is 
to identify common forms of long-term care and articulate the 
responsibilities of a long-term care administrator. Relationships 
with personnel and administrative structure are examined. Top-
ics include policy, procedures, insurance, and financing. Discus-
sion also covers the ethical and legal concerns of long-term care.
GERO 390 The Business of Aging (3)
Recommended: GERO 100 and ECON 201 (or ECON 203). A com-
prehensive study of the sources of economic security for older 
adults, the problems encountered in retirement, and the impact 
of an aging population on the nation’s economy. The goal is to 
outline the key sources of economic security received by older 
adults (including Social Security, pensions, personal savings, 
Medicare, and Medicaid); examine how economic security varies 
by race, ethnicity, gender, and social status as people age; evalu-
ate how longevity and the “graying” of society impact the nation’s 
economy; and explore potential solutions to the problems posed 
by entitlement programs. Topics include retirement planning; 
financing longevity; health, disability, and long-term care costs; 
economic disparities by social group; and the international eco-
nomics of aging.
GERO 427 Culture and Aging (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in behavioral and 
social sciences.) Recommended: GERO 100. An interdisciplin-
ary examination of how different cultures interpret and deal with 
aging and the life cycle. Focus is on the increasingly heteroge-
neous aging population in the United States. The goal is to raise 
critical awareness of how aging is experienced across cultures. 
Topics include cross-cultural theory and research on aging; 
global demographics of aging; cross-cultural perspectives of 
norms and values regarding work, family, and community roles 
for older adults; the social and economic status of older adults; 
intergenerational relationships; ethical caregiving; end-of-life 
issues; social services; and social policy. Health disparities 
among older adults of certain ethnicities within the United States 
are also addressed. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: GERO 327, GERO 410, or GERO 427.
GERO 486A Workplace Learning in Gerontology (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
GERO 486B Workplace Learning in Gerontology (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
GERO 495 Special Topics in Development  
and Health (1–3)
Specialized study in gerontology and related topics focusing on 
issues in development and health. May be repeated to a maxi-
mum of 6 credits when topics differ.
GERO 496 Special Topics in Social and  
Family Relations (1–3)
Specialized study in gerontology and related topics focusing on 
social and family relations. May be repeated to a maximum of  
6 credits when topics differ.
GERO 497 Special Topics in Administration  
and Planning (1–3)
Specialized study in gerontology and related topics focusing on 
administration and planning. May be repeated to a maximum of 
6 credits when topics differ.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
246
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Government and Politics 
GVPT 100 Introduction to Political Science (3)
A survey of the basic principles of political science. The 
objective is to define the main features of primary systems of 
political economy to understand differing methods of gover-
nance and articulate consequences of government actions in a 
globally interdependent system. Topics include the relationship 
of political science to the other social sciences; modern democ-
racy, political ideology, and political socialization; the function 
of public opinion, mass media, interest groups, and political par-
ties; the basic institutions of government and the separation of 
powers; and the role of international relations and globalization.
GVPT 101 Introduction to Political Theory (3)
An overview of the main schools of political theory, including 
democracy, authoritarianism, and alternative theories. The aim 
is to demonstrate familiarity with important thinkers and major 
works in the history of political theory; use theoretical language 
to analyze and critique political behavior and events; identify 
the strengths and weaknesses of different forms of govern-
ment; and demonstrate knowledge of crucial concepts (justice, 
power, authority, the state, social contract, etc.) and their his-
tory. Topics include the philosophical foundations of liberalism, 
socialism, and conservatism and the core political concepts of 
justice, power, and authority.
GVPT 125 Understanding 21st-Century Global 
Challenges (3)
An examination of the changing face of international affairs in 
a post–Cold War world and the role of the United States in the 
evolving international order. The aim is to recognize and explain 
trends in international affairs, apply theoretical frameworks in 
international relations, and analyze world events to explain and 
evaluate global developments. Focus is on the roles of key inter-
national institutions, states, nonstate actors, and globalization in 
the evolution of global relations since the collapse of the Soviet 
Union. Discussion also covers various influences on contempo-
rary affairs, including technology, migration, disease, economic 
development, and terrorism. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: GVPT 125 or GVPT 401.
GVPT 170 American Government (3)
A comprehensive study of government in the United States, 
including the basic principles of American government and 
political culture. The aim is to explain the vertical and horizontal 
structure of the American government and the roles of the three 
federal branches, bureaucracies, and the state governments; 
describe the development of the American political system and 
its impact on the political landscape; and explain the processes 
of the electoral system, political parties, and interest groups to 
persuade and influence. Institutions, processes, and public poli-
cies are examined from a cross-cultural perspective.
GVPT 200 International Political Relations (3)
A study of the major factors underlying international relations, 
the methods of conducting foreign relations, and the means of 
avoiding or alleviating international conflicts. The objective is to 
interact with global communities, contribute to policy formation, 
analyze differing worldviews, and apply historical and cultural 
contexts to identify probable outcomes of disputes. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: GVPT 
200 or GVPT 300.
GVPT 210 Introduction to Public Policy  
and Public Administration (3)
Prerequisite: GVPT 100. An introduction to the study of the 
administrative process in the executive branch and the struc-
ture and function of the federal system. The aim is to apply the 
mechanisms of policy formulation to the budgetary process, 
analyze the nature of public personnel policy and the funda-
mentals of organization theory, and evaluate the impact of new 
technologies on public organizations. Topics include the orga-
nizational structure, the political cultural environment, intergov-
ernmental relations, performance management, social equity, 
and public administration and public finance administration.
GVPT 280 Comparative Politics and Government (3)
An introductory study of institutional patterns and trends  
in a variety of countries with dissimilar governmental styles. 
The goal is to compare the stages of political development in 
the modern state system on a spectrum ranging from liberal 
democracies to authoritarian regimes. Discussion covers  
ethnic conflict and economic inequality in relation to the  
success and failure of governmental approaches in solving 
compelling issues.
GVPT 306 Global Political Economy (3)
A study of the relationship between political and economic 
processes in international affairs. Discussion covers the effect 
of globalization on the global environment, the economy, world 
peace, the power of the nation-state, and inequality between 
nation-states.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
247
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
GVPT 308 International Human Rights (3)
Recommended: GVPT 100. An examination of the principles and 
practices governing human rights from ancient times to con-
temporary international conventions and U.N. declarations. The 
aim is to analyze, evaluate, and discuss present national/inter-
national pushes for human rights and emancipation. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: GVPT 
308 or GVPT 399Y.
GVPT 403 Law, Morality, and War (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112. A study of just war traditions. The objec-
tive is to make informed decisions and analyze conflict. Discus-
sions cover the theoretical and practical connections between 
law, war, and morality.
GVPT 406 Global Terrorism (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112. An examination of the development of 
global terrorism and its impact on the international community. 
The goal is to participate in strategy and policy formulation  
and implementation, evaluate threats, and assess infrastruc-
tures that support global terrorist organizations. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: GVPT 401A 
or GVPT 406.
GVPT 407 State Terrorism (3)
An examination of the use of force and power (terrorism) by 
states against various populations to advance the interests of 
their civilization or state. The objective is to apply knowledge 
of culture, tradition, ideology, and methodology to comprehend 
state terrorism; analyze risk to national security; and explain 
how domestic climates and international relationships interact 
to support state terrorism. Topics include state behavior and 
norms; state interests, power, and force; application of power 
and force; and coercion within and among civilizations. Stu-
dents who have completed GVPT 401B or GVPT 401C may not 
receive credit for GVPT 407.
GVPT 408 Counterterrorism (3)
An investigation of counterterrorism (including its historical 
context), focusing on the evaluation of threats and the formu-
lation of defeat strategies. The aim is to evaluate response 
strategies, help improve offensive and defensive planning, and 
construct a defeat strategy for a terrorist threat. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: GVPT 399H 
or GVPT 408.
GVPT 409 Terrorism, Antiterrorism,  
and Homeland Security (3)
An expanded study of global terrorism and the impact on the 
homeland security of the United States in the 21st century. The 
objective is to investigate the relationship between the evolving 
terrorism threat environment and its impact on the U.S. home-
land. Topics include partners and approaches to detect, defeat, 
or mitigate terrorism and various ways the nation readies its 
diverse communities to identify, respond, and protect critical 
infrastructure. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: GVPT 409 or GVPT 498X.
GVPT 444 American Political Theory (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112. A study of the development and growth 
of American political concepts from the colonial period to the 
present. The objective is to apply the rule of law to the decision-
making process; interpret, apply, and synthesize the concepts of 
individual rights and collective responsibilities; and evaluate the 
interconnection between war, peace, and diplomacy.
GVPT 457 American Foreign Relations (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112. A study of the principles and machin-
ery of American foreign relations. The goal is to apply historical 
themes of American foreign policy to contemporary international 
relations, incorporate tenets of international law into American 
diplomatic approaches, and inform and influence policy making. 
Emphasis is on the conduct of the U.S. Department of State and 
the Foreign Service. Analysis covers the major foreign policies of 
the United States.
GVPT 475 The Presidency and the Executive Branch (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112. A study of the president’s influence 
on legislative matters, the president’s function in the executive 
branch (including domestic and foreign policy), and the presi-
dent’s role in his or her political party. The aim is to analyze con-
temporary uses of the presidency, evaluate an election strategy, 
and communicate realities of the presidential office.
GVPT 486A Workplace Learning in Government  
and Politics (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
248
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
GVPT 486B Workplace Learning in Government  
and Politics (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
GVPT 495 Political Science Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: WRTG 112 or equivalent and 9 upper-level credits 
in GVPT coursework. A study of political science that integrates 
knowledge gained through previous coursework and experi-
ence. The aim is to build on that conceptual foundation through 
integrative analysis, practical application, and critical thinking. 
Concepts and methods of political science are applied in produc-
ing a political, policy, or position paper for a project organization.
GVPT 498 Advanced Topics in Government  
and Politics (1)
In-depth study of topics of specialized interest. May be repeated 
to a maximum of 6 credits when topics differ.
Graphic Communication 
GRCO 100 Introduction to Graphic Communication (3)
(Access to Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator required.) An intro-
duction to graphic communication and the various roles and 
responsibilities of the profession. The aim is to demonstrate 
the skills and knowledge necessary for graphic communication 
professionals. Design theories and content are explored through 
hands-on projects. Topics include industry standards, portfolios, 
and research and assessment practices.
GRCO 230 Typography and Layout (3)
Prerequisites: GRCO 100 and ARTT 120. An introduction to 
typography and layout as compositional tools to construct 
graphic communications. The goal is to analyze and determine 
appropriate typefaces and apply typographical skills to layout 
design. Emphasis is on the individual aspects of the letterform 
and the interrelationship of letters on the page. Discussion 
covers the process of design, from research to comprehensive 
mock-up, to produce portfolio-quality designs.
GRCO 350 Intermediate Graphic Communication: 
Portfolio Development (3)
Prerequisite: GRCO 230. The development of a professional 
graphic communications portfolio. The goal is to assemble a 
select body of work for web presentation that demonstrates 
knowledge of color, typography, composition, and design.  
Projects are designed to synthesize and refine basic design 
skills. Emphasis is on gathering the elements of a cohesive 
portfolio and presenting a personal body of work. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: ARTT 250  
or GRCO 350.
GRCO 354 Digital Media (3)
(Formerly ARTT 354.) Prerequisite: GRCO 230. An introduction 
to digital media and design. The objective is to use current tech-
nologies in raster and vector image creation, two-dimensional 
animation, and the integration of text with graphics in cohesive 
layouts and to develop and oversee static and animated digital 
media projects through all stages of production. Focus is on 
advanced illustrative techniques for animated digital media, 
web graphics, and social media on a commercial level. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: ARTT 
354 or GRCO 354.
GRCO 355 Digital Media II (3)
Prerequisite: GRCO 354. Further examination of design for 
interactive media that incorporates raster- and vector-based 
visuals, video files, and brand generation. The goal is to use cur-
rent technologies to develop functional static and responsive 
multimedia layouts for a range of platforms, including desktop, 
handheld, and mobile devices. Discussion covers strategies for 
developing work for a variety of output applications. Focus is on 
production of portfolio-caliber projects that simulate real-world 
work experience.
GRCO 450 Advanced Graphic Communication: 
Professional Branding (3)
Prerequisites: GRCO 350 and GRCO 355. A review of professional 
branding and development of a portfolio and personal branding 
package. The objective is to synthesize, refine, and expand an 
existing portfolio to reflect personal branding. Focus is on refin-
ing a portfolio through peer review, critique, and assessment. 
Projects include creating a personal mission statement, identity 
package, and video component.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
249
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
GRCO 479 Motion Graphics (3)
(Formerly ARTT 479.) Prerequisite: GRCO 354 or ARTT 354. A 
study of media production. Discussion covers the aesthetic and 
practical aspects of creating moving images in a short movie 
or documentary. The goal is to understand the principles of 
preproduction, production, and postproduction. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: ARTT 479 or 
GRCO 479.
GRCO 486A Workplace Learning in Graphic 
Communication (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
GRCO 486B Workplace Learning in Graphic 
Communication (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
GRCO 495 Graphic Communication Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: GRCO 450, GRCO 458, or GRCO 479. A portfolio-
driven study of business and professional practices in the field of 
graphic communication. The goal is to be prepared for a career 
in graphic communication. Activities include review of existing 
work, creation of portfolio projects, and production of a profes-
sional portfolio (including a résumé). Focus is on applying skills 
(in areas such as motion graphics, typography, digital media, 
illustration, and commercial design) acquired through previous 
study. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ARTT 495 or GRCO 495.
Health Services 
Management 
HMGT 300 Introduction to the U.S. Healthcare Sector (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or WRTG 101. An overview of health-
care organizations in the United States and current and emerg-
ing concepts, trends, policies, and issues in healthcare. The 
aim is to explain the structure of the U.S. healthcare sector, 
understand the role of healthcare managers in meeting industry 
standards of care, and apply knowledge of healthcare workforce 
issues to solve management challenges. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 361, HMGT 
100, or HMGT 300.
HMGT 307 Managerial Epidemiology and  
Decision-Making in Healthcare (3)
Prerequisites: HMGT 300 and STAT 200. An overview of epi-
demiologic principles and tools applicable to decision-making 
in healthcare. The objective is to apply the basic principles 
of descriptive epidemiology to healthcare planning, directing, 
controlling, organizing, staffing, and financial management; 
critically evaluate the factors that influence the health status 
of populations served; and distinguish among study designs 
in terms of causal inference and sources of bias. Focus is on 
applying epidemiological and decision-making tools to integra-
tive decision-making in healthcare.
HMGT 310 Healthcare Policies (3)
Prerequisite: HMGT 307. An overview and analysis of public 
policies that govern the organization, delivery, and financing 
of health services in the United States. The aim is to evaluate 
national, state, and local policies to determine their impact on 
the delivery of healthcare services.
HMGT 320 Management in Healthcare Organizations (3)
Prerequisite: HMGT 307. An introduction to management in the 
healthcare services field. The aim is to explain key management 
concepts and apply them to the management of health services 
organizations. Discussion covers the management skills and 
capabilities that are essential for effective supervision and lead-
ership. An overview of the unique requirements of healthcare 
organizations and their management is provided. Focus is on 
the application of essential management and leadership skills 
in a healthcare environment. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BMGT 367 or HMGT 320.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
250
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
HMGT 322 Healthcare Financial Management (3)
Prerequisites: HMGT 300 (or BMGT 361) and HMGT 310. An 
overview of the acquisition, allocation, and management of the 
financial resources of healthcare organizations. Economic and 
accounting practices are discussed in terms of budget adminis-
tration, cost analysis, financial strategies, and internal controls. 
The goal is to examine financial information and regulatory 
requirements and policies, identify issues and solve problems, 
and make sound financial decisions in the healthcare field. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
HMGT 322 or HMGT 440.
HMGT 335 Healthcare Marketing (3)
Prerequisite: HMGT 307. An examination of the makeup of 
the healthcare market, the role of marketing in the delivery of 
healthcare, and relevant consumer behavior. Topics include 
basic principles and key concepts related to the design and 
implementation of marketing efforts in health services organiza-
tions. The goal is to develop and evaluate healthcare marketing 
plans. Discussion covers the marketing process and the devel-
opment and analysis of strategic healthcare marketing plans.
HMGT 372 Legal and Ethical Issues in Healthcare (3)
Prerequisite: HMGT 300 or NURS 300. An examination of legal 
and ethical issues encountered in healthcare management and 
the ramifications of those issues on the delivery of health serv-
ices and patient care. The aim is to apply ethical principles and 
practice within legal and ethical standards of healthcare.
HMGT 400 Research and Data Analysis in Healthcare (3)
Prerequisites: HMGT 320 and STAT 200. An introduction to 
research methods and the process of data identification and 
analysis in the healthcare field. The objective is to inform 
healthcare decision-making and formulate research hypoth-
eses. Emphasis is on the analytic process, especially in the pre-
sentation and interpretation of results. Topics include the use 
of healthcare databases, the analysis of problems and issues, 
and evaluation of research in healthcare settings. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: HMGT 398C 
or HMGT 400.
HMGT 420 Healthcare Facilities Management (3)
Prerequisite: HMGT 320. An examination of the organization 
and operation of hospitals and freestanding ambulatory care 
centers, with a focus on the manager’s role in internal opera-
tions and external relations. The objective is to understand the 
key issues driving healthcare facilities management and apply 
sound management principles to ensure successful operations. 
Discussion covers managed care programs and their impact on 
healthcare facilities management.
HMGT 435 Healthcare Economics (3)
Prerequisites: HMGT 300 (or BMGT 361) and HMGT 310. A 
comprehensive and analytical study of basic economics and 
its relationship to the delivery of healthcare. The aim is to apply 
the principles of economics to healthcare management and to 
anticipate the impact of economics on the outcomes of health-
care management decisions. Topics include the microeconomic 
aspects of the organization and delivery of healthcare, financ-
ing and other major components of the healthcare system, and 
economic factors that influence the delivery of healthcare.
HMGT 486A Workplace Learning in Healthcare  
Services Management (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
HMGT 486B Workplace Learning in Healthcare  
Services Management (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
HMGT 495 Strategic Planning and Leadership  
in Healthcare (3)
(Intended as a final, capstone course to be taken in a student’s 
last 15 credits.) Prerequisite: HMGT 320. A study of strategic 
planning and leadership within a healthcare organization. The 
aim is to integrate the knowledge and experience gained from 
previous study and build on that conceptual framework through 
analysis, practical application, and critical thinking. Leadership 
qualities and skills are also covered.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
251
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
History 
HIST 115 World History I (3)
Recommended: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A survey of global 
civilizations from prehistory to the 1500s. The aim is to explain 
the impact of environmental conditions on the development of 
civilizations using basic geographical knowledge; describe how 
human contacts, global connections, and migrations contribute 
to the development of civilizations; and compare the develop-
ment of institutions (social, political, familial, cultural, and 
religious) to explain their impact on societal transformations. 
Focus is on examining what history is and thinking critically 
about history by analyzing historical approaches and methods.
HIST 116 World History II (3)
Recommended: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A survey of global 
civilizations from the 1500s to the present. The aim is to explain 
the development of new political and economic systems using 
basic geographical knowledge; describe how human contacts, 
global connections, and migrations contribute to the develop-
ment of nations and global systems; and compare the devel-
opment of institutions (social, political, familial, cultural, and 
religious) to explain their impact on societal transformations. 
Focus is on examining what history is and thinking critically 
about history by analyzing historical approaches and methods.
HIST 125 Technological Transformations (3)
A focused survey of the intersection of technology and history 
and the evolutionary process that marks what we call prog-
ress. The objective is to apply historical precedent to everyday 
responsibilities and relationships in order to advance the goals 
and ideals of contemporary society; compare and contrast 
historical eras; and describe how events influence our sense of 
time, space, and technology.
HIST 141 Western Civilization I (3)
Recommended: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A survey of the history 
of Western civilization from antiquity through the Reformation. 
The objective is to chart major societal changes; identify major 
conflicts and wars; describe the evolution of religions; and 
recognize how philosophy and the arts reflect and influence 
peoples’ lives, cultures, and societies. The political, social, and 
intellectual developments that formed the values and institu-
tions of the Western world are examined.
HIST 142 Western Civilization II (3)
Recommended: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A survey of the history 
of Western civilization from the Reformation to modern times. 
The goal is to chart major societal changes; identify major con-
flicts and wars; describe the evolution of religions; and recog-
nize how philosophy and the arts reflect and influence peoples’ 
lives, cultures, and societies.
HIST 156 History of the United States to 1865 (3)
A survey of the United States from colonial times to the end of 
the Civil War. The establishment and development of national 
institutions are traced. The aim is to locate, evaluate, and use 
primary and secondary sources and interpret current events and 
ideas in a historical context. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: HIST 156 or HUMN 119.
HIST 157 History of the United States Since 1865 (3)
A survey of economic, intellectual, political, and social develop-
ments since the Civil War. The objective is to use primary and 
secondary sources to describe U.S. historical events and inter-
pret current events and ideas in a historical context. Discussion 
covers the rise of industry and the emergence of the United 
States as a world power. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: HIST 157 or HUMN 120.
HIST 202 Principles of War (3)
A study of the nine classic principles that guide the conduct of 
war at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels and form 
the foundation of the art and science of the military profession. 
The aim is to use primary and secondary historical resources to 
explore how past theory and practice have shaped the underly-
ing policy, strategic planning, and operational procedures of 
today’s military and national security agencies.
HIST 289 Historical Methods (3)
Prerequisite: A 100-level HIST course. An introduction to histori-
cal methods, approaches, and techniques. The goal is to explain 
what history is and why it matters, identify historical paradigms, 
and employ the moral and ethical standards of the historical 
profession. Focus is on the philosophical and practical skills 
employed by historians.
HIST 309 Historical Writing (3)
Prerequisite: HIST 289. A study of the historical research and 
writing process. The goal is to construct a framework for an 
original historical research project, locate and evaluate source 
materials, and demonstrate proficiency in research methods.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
252
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
HIST 316L The American West (3)
An examination of the exploration, settlement, development, 
and mythology of the American West, from 1490 to 1990, with 
attention paid to the role of the West as a key factor in the 
formation of national identity. Assignments include advanced 
reading and research.
HIST 326 The Roman Republic (3)
Prerequisite: Any writing course. A study of ancient Rome dur-
ing the period 753 to 44 BC, from its founding to the assassina-
tion of Julius Caesar. The goal is to use primary and secondary 
historical resources to explore Roman thought, demonstrate its 
influence in the modern Western world, and apply it to modern 
contexts. Focus is on Rome’s conquest of the Mediterranean 
world, the social and political pressures that led to that con-
quest, and the consequent transformation and decline of the 
republic. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: HIST 326 or HIST 421.
HIST 337 Europe and the World (3)
 An analysis of how European powers shaped and were shaped 
by global events between 1884 and 1989 from the Confer-
ence of Berlin to the fall of the Berlin Wall. Emphasis is on the 
reciprocal relationships between great cities and the outposts 
of European culture worldwide. The objective is to examine 
the interplay between Europe and colonial regions, subjects, 
cultures, politics, economies, and immigration.
HIST 365 Modern America (3)
 A comprehensive survey course that examines the history of 
the United States from 1933 to 2001. Discussion will focus 
on the expanding federal government; the Cold War and its 
legacy; the struggle over constitutional rights; and the changing 
landscape of American culture, society, and politics. The goal 
is to understand the impact of domestic and global issues on 
American society.
HIST 377 U.S. Women’s History: 1870 to 2000 (3)
An examination of the history of women in the United States 
from 1870 to the eve of the 21st century. The goal is to examine 
primary and secondary sources and documents to comprehend 
and articulate the impact of gender on the historical experi-
ences of American women. Historical methodologies that 
focus on the ways in which race, class, ethnicity, and sexuality 
have shaped these experiences are used to analyze the varied 
experiences of U.S. women. The relationship between these 
experiences and the larger historical forces of the era, including 
social movements, technology, and changing family roles and 
structure, is evaluated. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: HIST 211, HIST 367, or HIST 377.
HIST 381 America in Vietnam (3)
Prerequisite: A writing course. Recommended: WRTG 291. An 
examination of the complexity of the lengthy involvement of 
the United States in Vietnam. The goal is to engage in divergent 
historical interpretations and develop personal conclusions and 
perspectives about America’s role in Vietnam and its legacy. 
Discussion covers the social, cultural, political, and military 
dimensions of the Vietnam War, beginning with the declaration 
of Vietnamese independence at the conclusion of World War II. 
Emphasis is on the influence of the media in shaping govern-
ment policy and public opinion. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BEHS 337 or HIST 381.
HIST 392 History of the Contemporary Middle East (3)
Prerequisite: A writing course. Recommended: WRTG 291. A 
survey of the history of the Middle East from the late 19th cen-
tury to the present. The aim is to identify the important events 
of the last century in the Middle East; understand the sources of 
contention in that area; and examine the ideology, politics, and 
culture of the area and how they impact U.S.–Middle East rela-
tions. Focus is on major political, economic, social, and cultural 
trends that inform current events in the region. Topics include 
the late Ottoman Empire, European colonialism, the rise of 
nationalism and nation-states, the Arab-Israeli conflict, political 
Islam, the role of the United States in the region, and contempo-
rary approaches to modernity in the Middle East.
HIST 461 African American History:  
1865 to the Present (3)
Prerequisite: A writing course. Recommended: WRTG 291. An 
examination of African Americans in the United States since 
the Civil War. The objective is to examine the significance of the 
emancipation of African Americans and various leadership and 
philosophical perspectives within the African American com-
munity. Topics include emancipation and Reconstruction; segre-
gation, accommodationism, and institution building; migration 
and urbanization; resistance and the birth and growth of the 
civil rights movement; and the problem of race and racism as a 
national issue with global impact in the modern world.
HIST 462 The U.S. Civil War (3)
An examination of the origins, conduct, and impact of the 
American Civil War and Reconstruction (1850–77). The goal is 
to apply historical methodology to issues of the Civil War and 
Reconstruction; assess Civil War strategies, tactics, and opera-
tions; and evaluate how race, culture, politics, and technology 
affected the course of the Civil War and Reconstruction.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
253
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
HIST 464 World War I (3)
Prerequisite: Any writing course. An intensive study of the First 
World War. Topics include the development of nationalism 
and socialism in late 19th-century Europe, the causes of the 
First World War, trench warfare on the western front, war in the 
Balkans, total war on the home fronts, the Russian Revolution of 
1917, the collapse of the Central Powers, the 1918 settlements, 
the postwar conflicts that continued to haunt Europe until 1923, 
and the concept of the Lost Generation.
HIST 465 World War II (3)
An investigation of the global issues and events that led to the 
Second World War. Emphasis is on analyzing the factors that 
contributed to the competing ideologies, as well as the social, 
political, and economic conditions that ignited the most lethal 
conflict in human history. The goal is to understand the causes, 
nature, and outcome of the Second World War and the impact 
on the world in which we live.
HIST 480 History of China to 1912 (3)
A study of the history of China from Confucius (around 500 BC) 
to the demise of the Qing dynasty in 1912. The objectives are 
to interpret, educate, and advise others based on a historical, 
cultural, and social awareness of traditional China. Emphasis 
is on the changes within Chinese political, social, cultural, and 
philosophical structures that have molded the history of China 
and its peoples.
HIST 482 History of Japan to 1800 (3)
Prerequisite: A writing course. Recommended: WRTG 291. An 
examination of traditional Japanese civilization from the age of 
Shinto mythology to the late Edo period. The aim is to interpret, 
educate, and advise others based on a historical, cultural, and 
social awareness of traditional Japan.
HIST 483 History of Japan Since 1800 (3)
Prerequisite: A writing course. Recommended: WRTG 291. An 
examination of Japan’s emergence as an industrial society and 
world power. The goal is to interpret, educate, and advise others 
based on a historical, cultural, and social awareness of modern 
Japan. Discussion covers Japan’s role in World War II, postwar 
recovery, and re-emergence as an exporter of cultural goods.
HIST 486A Workplace Learning in History (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
HIST 486B Workplace Learning in History (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
HIST 495 History Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: 21 credits in HIST courses, including HIST 289 and 
HIST 309. Intensive research into a specific topic in history of 
the student’s choice. The objective is to produce a substantial, 
original historical research project suitable for presentation  
or publication.
Homeland Security 
HMLS 302 Introduction to Homeland Security (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An introduction to the 
theory and practice of homeland security in both the public 
and private sector at national, regional, state, and local levels. 
The objective is to apply management concepts to homeland 
security, identify legal and policy issues related to homeland 
security, and compare the four phases of homeland security. An 
overview of the administrative, legislative, and operational ele-
ments of homeland security programs and processes (including 
a review of homeland security history, policies, and programs) 
is provided. Topics include the threat of terrorism and counter-
measures, including intelligence, investigation, and policy that 
support U.S. homeland security objectives.
HMLS 304 Strategic Planning in Homeland Security (3)
Prerequisite: HMLS 406. Recommended: HMLS 310, HMLS 408, 
HMLS 414, and HMLS 416. An examination of the fundamentals 
of strategic planning, necessary for the maintenance of domes-
tic security and the operation of the homeland security organiza-
tion in the public and private sectors. The goal is to develop and 
analyze homeland security strategic plans. Topics include orga-
nizational priorities, planning documents, policy development, 
legislation, financial operations, and the evaluation process. 
Analysis covers threat, risk, vulnerability, probability, and impact 
as parameters for decision-making and resource allocation.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
254
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
HMLS 310 Homeland Security Response  
to Critical Incidents (3)
Prerequisites: HMLS 302 and HMLS 406. A real-world assess-
ment of the issues involved in responding to homeland security 
critical incidents. The aim is to prepare for future challenges, 
integrate critical incident responses at all levels, and analyze 
the effect of regulations and laws on critical incident response. 
Discussion covers historical and potential incidents as they 
relate to resources, cooperation, politics, regulations, opera-
tions, and postincident response.
HMLS 406 Legal and Political Issues  
of Homeland Security (3)
Prerequisite: HMLS 302. A study of the legal aspects of and  
public policy in homeland security. The aim is to analyze gov-
ernmental and private-sector roles and form a model homeland 
security policy. The development of public policy in homeland 
security is examined at local, regional, national, and international  
levels. Topics include surveillance, personal identity verification, 
personal privacy and redress, federal legislation passed in the 
aftermath of the terrorist attacks of 2001, the rights of foreign 
nationals, the rights of U.S. citizens, the governmental infrastruc-
ture for decisions concerning legal rights, and the difficulties 
of prosecuting terrorist suspects (such as jurisdictional issues, 
rules of evidence, and prosecution strategies).
HMLS 408 Infrastructure in Homeland Security (3)
Prerequisite: HMLS 406. An examination of infrastructure pro-
tection at international, national, regional, state, and local levels. 
The objective is to assess threat, risk, and vulnerabilities and 
recommend protective measures. Topics include critical infra-
structure at all levels of government, the private sector, and the 
international community. An overview of U.S. homeland security 
policy as it relates to the protection of critical infrastructures 
and key assets (including the roles of the federal, state, and 
local governments and the private sector in the security of 
these resources) is provided. Focus is on risk reduction and 
protection of critical infrastructures using available resources 
and partnerships between the public and private sectors.
HMLS 414 Homeland Security and Intelligence (3)
Prerequisite: HMLS 406. A study of the role of intelligence in 
homeland security. The objective is to interpret the concepts 
of information; analyze the production of intelligence; and 
recognize the U.S. intelligence and law enforcement communi-
ties, as well as other agencies and organizations that have a 
part in the nation’s homeland security intelligence activities. 
Topics include the various steps of the intelligence process: the 
collection, analysis, sharing, and dissemination of information 
between governments and between government and the private 
sector. Emphasis is on evaluating current intelligence and 
enforcement efforts. Discussion also covers future challenges 
and opportunities for intelligence operations.
HMLS 416 Homeland Security and  
International Relations (3)
Prerequisite: HMLS 406. An examination of the relationship of 
international institutions to U.S. homeland security policy, intel-
ligence, and operations. The aim is to incorporate a global per-
spective in the development of U.S. homeland security, analyze 
international institutions that influence U.S. homeland security, 
and integrate international information sharing in public- and 
private-sector approaches to security. Domestic security opera-
tions abroad are compared to U.S. policy, laws, and procedures. 
Topics include the commonality of global approaches to domes-
tic security everywhere and the value of information sharing 
between governments and international institutions.
HMLS 495 Homeland Security Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: At least 15 credits in upper-level FSCN, EMGT, 
HMLS, or PSAD courses (numbered 300 or 400). A study of 
leadership theories, skills, and techniques used in the public 
safety professions. The interdisciplinary perspective—encom-
passing criminal justice, emergency management, fire science, 
and homeland security—is designed to support integrated public 
safety management. A review of current issues and contempo-
rary leadership styles in the public safety professions integrates 
knowledge and principles gained through previous coursework. 
Case studies and exercises are used to address challenges in 
strategic planning. Other tools focus on evaluation of personal 
leadership styles and techniques.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
255
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Humanities 
HUMN 100 Introduction to Humanities (3)
An introduction to the humanities through a review of some 
of the major developments in human culture. The goal is to 
analyze how societies express their ideas through art, literature, 
music, religion, and philosophy and to consider some of the 
underlying assumptions about the way societies are formed and 
run. Focus is on developing the conceptual tools to understand 
cultural phenomena critically.
HUMN 344 Technology and Culture (3)
An interdisciplinary survey examining the impact technology 
has on human culture. The objective is to evaluate the influence 
technology has on the human experience, employ interdisciplin-
ary knowledge on issues of technology and culture, and commu-
nicate in writing and via oral presentation the results of critical 
reflection and cultural criticism. Topics include technology and 
history, misinformation and disinformation, social media, ethics, 
the arts, race and gender, transhumanism, and technology and 
the self.
HUMN 351 Myth in the World (3)
Recommended: HUMN 100. An interdisciplinary survey of myths 
from around the world. The objective is to evaluate the influ-
ences of myth on culture and society; develop critical reflection 
using the methods of interdisciplinary study; discuss how myths 
shape cultural, individual, and national identities; and communi-
cate in writing and via oral presentation the influence of world 
myths on their material and nonmaterial culture. Topics include 
origin myths, comparative mythology, gender, the archetypes, 
heroes, tricksters, material and nonmaterial culture, ritual, and 
sacred place.
HUMN 495 Humanities Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: HUMN 100, an upper-level ARTH course, an 
upper-level ENGL course, an upper-level HUMN course, and an 
upper-level PHIL course. A study of humanities that synthesizes 
knowledge gained through previous study. An individually chosen 
research project is used to examine the nature of human respon-
sibility to self, others, and the environment; the role of intellectual 
inquiry in human life; and the role of creativity in human life. 
Career options are also explored.
Human Resource 
Management 
HRMN 300 Human Resource Management (3)
A basic study of the strategic role of human resource manage-
ment. The objective is to apply knowledge of human behavior, 
labor relations, and current laws and regulations to a working 
environment. Topics include employment laws and regulations, 
diversity in a global economy, total rewards management, and 
training and development for organizational success. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 
360, HRMN 300, or TMGT 360.
HRMN 302 Organizational Communication (3)
A study of the structure of communication in organizations. 
The goal is to apply theory and examples to improve manage-
rial effectiveness in communication and negotiation. Problems, 
issues, and techniques of organizational communication are 
analyzed through case histories, exercises, and projects. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
BMGT 398N, HRMN 302, MGMT 320, MGST 315, or TEMN 315.
HRMN 362 Labor Relations (3)
A survey of contemporary labor relations practices. The aim 
is to research and analyze labor relations issues and support 
the labor relations process. Discussion covers the history of 
organized labor in the United States, the role of third parties, 
organizing campaigns, the collective bargaining process, and the 
resolution of employee grievances. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: BMGT 362 or HRMN 362.
HRMN 367 Organizational Culture and Change (3)
An examination of the nature, definitions, theories, and aspects 
of organizational culture. The goal is to apply knowledge of 
organizational culture to develop a change-management plan. 
Analysis covers patterns of behavior and their relationship to 
organizational culture, especially the impact of the organiza-
tion’s business on employee behavior and culture. Topics 
include the role of nationality, gender, and race within orga-
nizational culture; implications of addressing organizational 
challenges; theory versus practice; and the relative roles of the 
individual, groups, and the organization in a cultural context. 
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 398T or HRMN 367.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
256
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
HRMN 395 The Total Rewards Approach  
to Compensation Management (3)
Prerequisite: HRMN 300. An exploration of alternative compen-
sation philosophies that define total rewards as everything that 
employees value in the employment relationship. The objective 
is to design a total rewards program that ensures organizational 
success. Topics include building and communicating a total 
rewards strategy, compensation fundamentals, the conduct and 
documentation of a job analysis, linking pay to performance, 
employee motivation, and performance appraisal. Strategies 
such as incentive cash and/or stock compensation programs, 
employee ownership, benefits, and nonmonetary rewards are 
discussed and evaluated. The interrelationships among com-
pensation, motivation, performance appraisal, and performance 
within the organization are examined. Discussion also covers 
the design and implementation of a total rewards program, 
including organizational compatibility. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 388L,  
HRMN 390, or HRMN 395.
HRMN 400 Talent Acquisition and Management (3)
Prerequisite: HRMN 300. A study of the role of human resource 
management in the strategic planning and operation of organi-
zations, including staffing, onboarding, recruiting, performance 
appraisal systems, and compensation and labor/manage-
ment issues. The goal is to research and evaluate issues and 
present strategic solutions related to talent acquisition and 
management. The influence of federal regulations (including 
equal opportunity, sexual harassment, discrimination, and other 
employee-related regulations) is analyzed. A review of research 
findings, readings, discussions, case studies, and applicable 
federal regulations supports the critical evaluation of human 
resource problems as they relate to the employment life cycle. 
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 460 or HRMN 400.
HRMN 406 Employee Training and Development (3)
Prerequisite: HRMN 300. An examination of employee training 
and human resource development in various organizations. Top-
ics include the development, administration, and evaluation of 
training programs; employee development; career development; 
and organizational change. Issues in employee development 
(including assessment of employee competencies, opportu-
nities for learning and growth, and the roles of managers in 
employee development) are explored. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 498I,  
HRMN 406, or MGMT 498I.
HRMN 408 Employment Law for Business (3)
(Designed for managers and human resource professionals.) 
Prerequisite: HRMN 300. A conceptual and functional analysis 
of the legal framework of employment relations. The aim is to 
understand employment law; comply with laws and regulations; 
and evaluate rights, obligations, and liabilities in the employ-
ment process, from hiring and staffing to compensation and 
layoff. Topics include discrimination based on race, national 
origin, religion, sex, affinity and sexual orientation, age, and dis-
ability; the hiring process, testing, and performance appraisal; 
employee privacy; wrongful discharge; employee benefits; 
health and safety; independent contractors; and labor unions. 
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 468, BMGT 498G, HRMN 408, or MGMT 498G.
HRMN 410 HR Information Systems  
and Metrics Analysis (3)
A study of human resource metrics associated with perfor-
mance management, talent acquisition, retention, and employee 
engagement in the strategic planning and operation of organi-
zations. The goal is to research and evaluate HR information 
systems for the collection, mining, dissemination, and analysis 
of data related to HR issues and present strategic solutions. 
A review of research findings and case studies supports the 
critical evaluation of human resource problems. Common HR 
metrics are applied to people analytics for problem-solving.
HRMN 467 Global Human Resource Management (3)
Prerequisite: HRMN 300. A comprehensive study of global 
human resource management. The objective is to demonstrate 
intercultural competencies; identify trends in the globalized 
workforce; and analyze policies, practices, and functions in 
global human resources. Topics include global staffing, training, 
compensation, and evaluation.
HRMN 486A Workplace Learning in Human  
Resource Management (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
HRMN 486B Workplace Learning in Human  
Resource Management (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
257
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
HRMN 495 Contemporary Issues in Human  
Resource Management Practice (3)
(Intended as a final, capstone course to be taken in a student’s 
last 15 credits.) Prerequisite: HRMN 400. A study of human 
resource management that integrates knowledge gained 
through previous coursework and experience and builds on that 
conceptual foundation through integrative analysis, practical 
application, and critical thinking. The goal is to consider and 
analyze emerging issues in human resource management. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
BMGT 388K, HRMN 494, or HRMN 495.
Information Systems 
Management 
IFSM 201 Concepts and Applications  
of Information Technology (3)
(Access to a standard office productivity package, i.e., word 
processing, spreadsheet, database, and presentation software, 
required.) An introduction to data and the range of technologies 
(including hardware, software, databases, and networking and 
information systems) that provide the foundation for the data-
centric focus of modern organizations. The objective is to apply 
knowledge of basic technical, ethical, and security consider-
ations to select and use information technology (and the data 
that arise from technology) effectively in one’s personal and pro-
fessional lives. Discussion covers issues related to technology 
as a vehicle for collecting, storing, and sharing data and informa-
tion, including privacy, ethics, security, and social impact. Applied 
exercises focus on the manipulation, analysis, and visualization 
of data and effective data communication strategies. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 
301, CAPP 101, CAPP 300, CMST 300, IFSM 201, or TMGT 201.
IFSM 300 Information Systems in Organizations (3)
An overview of information systems and how they provide value 
by supporting organizational objectives. The goal is to analyze 
business strategies to recognize how technology solutions 
enable strategic outcomes and to identify information system 
requirements by analyzing business processes. Discussion cov-
ers concepts of business processes and alignment of informa-
tion systems solutions to strategic goals.
IFSM 301 Foundations of Management  
Information Systems (3)
Prerequisite: IFSM 300. An overview of information technology 
management and governance. The goal is to be familiar with 
IT organizations, management of IT strategy, and factors in IT 
decision-making. Topics include strategic alignment, portfolio 
management, risk management, business continuity, compli-
ance, and organizational relationships.
IFSM 304 Ethics in Information Technology (3)
A comprehensive study of ethics and of personal and organiza-
tional ethical decision-making in the use of information systems 
in a global environment. The aim is to identify ethical issues 
raised by existing and emerging technologies, apply a struc-
tured framework to analyze risk and decision alternatives, and 
understand the impact of personal ethics and organizational 
values on an ethical workplace.
IFSM 305 Information Systems  
in Healthcare Organizations (3)
An overview of how information systems provide value by sup-
porting organizational objectives in the healthcare sector. The 
goal is to evaluate how technology solutions support organiza-
tional strategy in the healthcare environment and improve qual-
ity of care, safety, and financial management. Topics include the 
flow of data among disparate health information systems and 
the ethical, legal, and regulatory policy implications.
IFSM 310 Software and Hardware  
Infrastructure Concepts (3)
Prerequisite: IFSM 301. A study of the hardware, software, and 
network components of computer systems and their inter-
relationships. The objective is to select appropriate compo-
nents for organizational infrastructures. Discussion covers the 
application of system development life-cycle methodology to 
build secure integrated systems that meet business require-
ments. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: CMIS 270, CMIS 310, CMSC 311, or IFSM 310.
IFSM 311 Enterprise Architecture (3)
Prerequisite: IFSM 310. A study of enterprise architecture 
and frameworks, including the transition of current business 
processes and functional systems to an enterprise solution. 
The aim is to analyze how enterprise architecture and resulting 
enterprise systems support an organization’s ability to adapt 
and respond to a continually changing business and competi-
tive environment.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
258
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
IFSM 330 Business Intelligence and Data Analytics (3)
A hands-on, project-based introduction to databases, business 
intelligence, and data analytics. The aim is to design secure 
industry-standard databases and utilize business intelligence 
and data analytics techniques and technologies to support 
decision-making. Topics include data and relational databases, 
SQL queries, business intelligence tools and alignment with 
business strategy, data analytics, and visualization techniques.
IFSM 370 Telecommunications  
in Information Systems (3)
Prerequisite: IFSM 300. An introduction to telecommunication 
infrastructure. The goal is to plan, analyze, and design a secure 
telecommunication infrastructure that meets business needs 
and protects information assets. Topics include cybersecurity, 
data communication protocols and standards, networks, and 
trends in telecommunications. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: CMIS 370, CMSC 370, CSIA 
302, IFSM 370, or IFSM 450.
IFSM 380 Managing and Leading  
in Information Technology (3)
Prerequisite: IFSM 201 or IFSM 300. A foundation in leadership 
skills for the fast-paced information technology environment. 
The goal is to expand interpersonal communication skills, think 
critically, solve problems, and apply basic management princi-
ples to complete tasks effectively. Topics include effective com-
munication in customer facing and managerial environments, 
critical thinking and problem-solving, time management, and the 
application of leadership and management concepts in the work-
place of today and tomorrow. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: IFSM 380 or IFSM 250.
IFSM 432 Business Continuity Planning (3)
Prerequisite: IFSM 311. An analysis of the requirements for 
business continuity and disaster recovery planning related to 
mission critical business information systems. The goal is to 
assess the risk to continuity of business processes, develop 
a business continuity/disaster recovery plan according to indus-
try standards and best practices, and develop a test plan. Top-
ics include risk assessment and organizational requirements for 
maintaining systems. A group project is designed to produce 
and validate a comprehensive business continuity and disaster 
recovery plan. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: IFSM 432 or IFSM 498N.
IFSM 438 Information Systems Project Management (3)
Prerequisite: IFSM 300 or CSIA 350. A practical application of 
project management principles and procedures. The objective 
is to manage and control IT projects in alignment with organi-
zational strategic goals and within resource constraints and to 
manage high-performing project teams to implement IT solu-
tions. Topics include the development, control, and execution 
of plans to manage information systems projects as part of a 
team and the use of Microsoft Project to develop project sched-
ules and related components. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: IFSM 438 or TMGT 430.
IFSM 441 Agile Project Management (3)
Prerequisite: IFSM 438. An advanced study of agile project man-
agement methods for software development. The objective is to 
apply agile practices to better manage projects characterized by 
complexity and uncertainty with responsiveness and adaptabil-
ity and to consider alternative approaches to managing projects 
by matching the approach to the characteristics of a project. 
Topics include estimation techniques; the scrum (software 
development) process, i.e., inspect, adapt, and improve; and 
dealing with organizational impediments to adoption.
IFSM 461 Systems Analysis and Design (3)
Prerequisites: IFSM 311 and either IFSM 330 or CMIS 320. A 
project-driven study of tools and techniques for translating busi-
ness requirements into operational systems. The goal is to plan, 
build, and maintain systems that meet organizational strategic 
goals by applying enterprise architecture and enterprise gover-
nance principles and practices. Topics include processes and 
system development life-cycle methodologies, data modeling 
methods, and the importance of stakeholder involvement. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
IFSM 436, IFSM 460, or IFSM 461.
IFSM 486A Workplace Learning in Management 
Information Systems (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
IFSM 486B Workplace Learning in Management 
Information Systems (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
259
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
IFSM 495 Management Information  
Systems Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: IFSM 438 and IFSM 461. A practical application 
of the knowledge and experience gained from previous study in 
management information systems. The aim is to demonstrate  
a mastery of management information systems concepts. 
Emerging issues and trends in management information sys-
tems are considered.
Japanese 
JAPN 111 Elementary Japanese I (3)
For online sections, sound card, microphone, speakers, and 
occasional synchronous work required. (Not open to native 
speakers of Japanese; assumes no prior knowledge of 
Japanese. Students with prior experience with the Japanese 
language should take a placement test to assess appropri-
ate level.) An introduction to spoken and written Japanese 
language. The objective is to communicate in Japanese in 
some concrete, real-life situations using culturally appropriate 
language; read and write hiragana; and read some katakana 
words in context.
JAPN 112 Elementary Japanese II (3)
For online sections, sound card, microphone, speakers, and 
occasional synchronous work required. (Not open to native 
speakers of Japanese.) Prerequisite: JAPN 111 or appropriate 
score on a placement test. A continued introduction to spoken 
and written Japanese. The goal is to communicate in Japa-
nese in concrete, real-life situations using culturally appropri-
ate language; read and write katakana; and recognize some 
kanji characters in context. Practice is provided in improving 
pronunciation and developing the oral and written skills used in 
everyday communication.
JAPN 114 Elementary Japanese III (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Japanese.) Prerequisite: JAPN 112 or appropriate score on a 
placement test. Further study of spoken and written Japanese. 
The aim is to communicate in Japanese in a variety of concrete, 
real-life situations using culturally appropriate language and 
to expand recognition of kanji characters in context. Practice 
is provided in improving pronunciation and developing the oral 
and written skills used in everyday communication.
JAPN 115 Elementary Japanese IV (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Japanese.) Prerequisite: JAPN 114 or appropriate score on a 
placement test. Further development of skills in elementary 
spoken and written Japanese. The aim is to interact effec-
tively with native speakers of Japanese in a variety of real-life 
situations using culturally appropriate language and to recog-
nize and distinguish more commonly used kanji characters in 
context. Practice is provided in fine-tuning pronunciation and 
applying language skills to a range of contexts.
JAPN 221 Intermediate Japanese I (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Japanese.) Prerequisite: JAPN 115 or appropriate score on a 
placement test. Development of skills in intermediate spoken 
and written Japanese. The aim is to interact effectively with 
native speakers of Japanese in a range of personal and pro-
fessional situations and to recognize and read approximately 
275 Japanese characters in context. Focus is on using culturally 
appropriate language in a variety of contexts.
JAPN 222 Intermediate Japanese II (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Japanese.) Prerequisite: JAPN 221 or appropriate score on a 
placement test. Further development of skills in intermediate 
spoken and written Japanese. The aim is to communicate effec-
tively with native speakers of Japanese in a broad range  
of personal and professional situations and to recognize and 
read approximately 320 Japanese characters in context. Prac-
tice is provided in interacting with others in a variety of interper-
sonal contexts.
JAPN 333 Japanese Society and Culture (3)
(Formerly ASTD 333. Fulfills the general education requirement 
in the arts and humanities. Conducted in English.) A study of 
the origin and historical background of contemporary Japanese 
society and culture. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: ASTD 333 or JAPN 333.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
260
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Journalism 
JOUR 201 Introduction to News Writing (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications.) 
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An introduction to writ-
ing news articles for print and electronic media. The aim is to 
evaluate the newsworthiness of information and events and 
write in journalistic style. Emphasis is on writing, from mechan-
ics (grammar, spelling, punctuation, and journalistic style) to 
content (accuracy, completeness, audience, and readability)  
and reporting.
JOUR 330 Public Relations Theory (3)
Prerequisite: JOUR 201. A study of the evolution, scope, and 
contemporary practice of public relations and its strategic value 
in business, nonprofits, government, associations, and other 
organizations. The goal is to apply legal, ethical, and profes-
sional standards to the everyday practice of public relations. 
Topics include communication theory, social science, and 
audience dimensions as they are applied to a four-step process: 
research, planning, communication, and evaluation.
JOUR 486A Workplace Learning in Journalism (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
JOUR 486B Workplace Learning in Journalism (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
Korean 
KORN 333 Korean Society and Culture (3)
(Formerly ASTD 353. Fulfills the general education requirement 
in the arts and humanities. Conducted in English.) Recom-
mended: Any writing class and either ASTD 284 or ASTD 285. 
An interdisciplinary study of contemporary Korea from a variety 
of sociohistorical and cultural perspectives. Topics include the 
Korean diaspora, the Korean Wave (Hallyu), Korea as a conduit 
between China and Japan, social and religious practices, Korean 
women, the Japanese occupation, and Korea’s global impact. 
The aim is to articulate the key historic developments that have 
shaped contemporary Korean society, recognize and distinguish 
unique Korean influences and contributions, and assess key 
aspects of traditional and contemporary Korean society and 
culture. Focus is on developing a stronger understanding of 
Korean society and culture for practical and professional appli-
cation. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: ASTD 353 or KORN 333.
Legal Studies 
LGST 101 Introduction to Law (3)
A survey of the U.S. legal system and the roles and responsibili-
ties of the various personnel who work in that environment. 
The objective is to evaluate situations and make recommenda-
tions for action based on an understanding of law, legal institu-
tions, and court procedures. Topics include the organization 
and powers of federal and state lawmaking institutions, court 
procedures, legal analysis, and careers in the legal environ-
ment. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: LGST 101 or PLGL 101.
LGST 200 Techniques of Legal Research (3)
An introduction to common research methods used to locate 
primary and secondary authority relevant to given topics and 
issues. The goal is to find valid, relevant, mandatory primary 
authority. Topics include the analysis, publication, and citation 
of judicial opinions and statutory law; the features and use of 
secondary sources; and various computer-assisted research 
tools to find and validate primary authority. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: LGST 200  
or PLGL 200.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
261
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
LGST 201 Legal Writing (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 200. An introduction to the principles of 
writing clearly and effectively in the legal environment. The 
objective is to draft writings that synthesize law, analyze legal 
issues, and explain law and legal analysis to a nonlegal audi-
ence. Assignments include a legal synthesis memo, case law 
and statutory analysis memos, and a client letter. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: LGST 201  
or PLGL 201.
LGST 204 Legal Ethics (3)
A survey of basic principles relating to the ethical practice of 
law. The objective is to identify ethical problems, draft writ-
ings that apply ethical rules and interpretations to legal ethical 
dilemmas, and avoid and resolve legal ethical problems through 
appropriate use of office procedures. Rules and guidelines 
governing the ethical conduct of lawyers and nonlawyers are 
covered, as are law office management principles relevant to 
ethical requirements. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: LGST 204 or PLGL 204.
LGST 300 Advanced Legal Research and Analysis (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 200. An in-depth examination of research 
methods to identify primary authority relevant to legal issues. 
The goal is to identify legal issues, implement research strate-
gies to find relevant primary authority, and use this authority to 
analyze the issues. Topics include the use of computer-assisted 
legal research systems to locate case law, statutory law, admin-
istrative law, and rules of procedure and evidence and methods 
to identify and analyze legal issues. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: LGST 400 or PLGL 400.
LGST 301 Advanced Legal Writing (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 201. A focused study of the principles and 
techniques for drafting legal advocacy writings. The objective is 
to analyze legal issues and advocate for results based on that 
analysis. Assignments include a complex office memorandum, 
a demand letter, and an external advocacy memorandum. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
LGST 301, LGST 401, or PLGL 401.
LGST 312 Torts (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 201. A study of the causes of action, 
defenses, and remedies in the major categories of tort law, as 
well as tort-litigation procedures and writings. The goal is to 
investigate and evaluate tort claims in order to develop litigation 
strategies and to research law in order to draft legal writings 
that support a legal conclusion. Topics include intentional torts, 
negligence, strict liability, damages, and civil procedure. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
LGST 312 or PLGL 312.
LGST 314 Workers’ Compensation Law (1)
A thorough study of the Maryland Workers’ Compensation Act 
and the practice of workers’ compensation law in Maryland. 
The goal is to apply knowledge of legal systems, concepts, and 
methodologies to support client objectives efficiently and ethi-
cally. Topics include employer/employee relationships, injuries, 
defenses, compensation benefits, vocational rehabilitation, 
and appeals. Assignments include legal and factual research 
and the composition of legal documents or completion of 
forms. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: LGST 314 or PLGL 398H.
LGST 315 Domestic Relations (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 201. A study of the processes, procedures, 
and writings of family law practice. The aim is to identify, ana-
lyze, and apply the rules of professional conduct to domestic 
issues; research applicable law and factual information related 
to domestic relations issues and draft legal writings; and com-
plete standardized forms to resolve domestic issues. Topics 
include divorce, separation, and annulment and alimony; child 
custody and visitation; child support; disposition of property; 
and the legal rights of children. Relevant aspects of civil proce-
dures, enforcement, and the modification of orders and agree-
ments are covered. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: FMCD 487, LGST 315, or PLGL 315.
LGST 316 Estates and Probate (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 201. A fundamental study of the legal con-
cepts required to draft and prepare simple wills and administer 
estates. The goal is to construct an estate plan supporting the 
creation and administration of a simple estate. Topics include 
preliminary and practical considerations of administering an 
estate; the appraisal of estate assets and probate inventory; 
inheritance taxes; claims against the estate; management of 
debts, accounting, and distribution considerations; the drafting 
and execution of wills; and guardianships. Assignments include 
legal research and written analysis that reflect the processes 
and procedures required by law. Students may receive credit  
for only one of the following courses: LGST 316, PLGL 216,  
or PLGL 316.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
262
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
LGST 320 Criminal Law and Procedures (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 201. A study of the substantive and proce-
dural aspects of the criminal justice system. The objective is to 
identify, analyze, and apply the rules of professional conduct to 
develop ethical strategies, research law, and draft legal writings 
to support the prosecution or defense of crimes. Topics include 
crimes and defenses, penalties, and court procedures. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: LGST 
320 or PLGL 320.
LGST 325 Litigation (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 201. A comprehensive study of the Federal 
Rules of Civil Procedure and the process of civil litigation. The 
aim is to use technology and administrative best practices to 
collect, track, retrieve, and prepare evidence during the litigation 
process; interpret and apply the rules to develop case strate-
gies; and interact with individuals within the legal system to 
effectively and ethically support the litigation process. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: LGST 
325 or PLGL 325.
LGST 327 Alternative Dispute Resolution (3)
An overview of the various processes and techniques to settle 
disputes without court adjudication. Topics include alternatives 
to litigation and their advantages, characteristics of effective 
mediation, ethics, and virtual dispute resolution techniques. The 
objective is to become familiar with various methods of dispute 
resolution and potential career opportunities in alternative dis-
pute resolution. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: LGST 327, PLGL 327, or PLGL 398G.
LGST 330 Administrative Law (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 201. An overview of the functions and 
procedures of federal and state administrative agencies. The 
goal is to monitor and analyze administrative agency actions in 
order to make recommendations to proposed and final agency 
rules and administrative decisions. Topics include rulemak-
ing, adjudication, the use and control of agency discretion, and 
disclosure of information. Focus is on researching relevant law 
and writing effective and persuasive communications for use 
in administrative adjudications or to obtain information held by 
government agencies. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: LGST 330 or PLGL 330.
LGST 340 Contract Law (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 201. A comprehensive study of the major 
areas of contract law. The objective is to identify and analyze 
contractual precedent and statutory authority; develop litigation 
strategies; and explain contract concepts, remedies, and proce-
dures that support a legal conclusion. Topics include formation, 
interpretation and enforcement, discharge, breach, and rem-
edies for breach. Students may receive credit for only one of  
the following courses: LGST 340 or PLGL 340.
LGST 486A Workplace Learning in Legal Studies (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
LGST 486B Workplace Learning in Legal Studies (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
LGST 495 Legal Studies Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: LGST 301. A portfolio-driven study of professional 
practices in the legal field. The goal is to integrate the competen-
cies gained through previous coursework and experience. Assign-
ments include projects relevant to work in the legal environment.
Library Skills and 
Information Literacy 
LIBS 150 Introduction to Research (1)
An introduction to the research process and methods for retriev-
ing information in a library or through online sources. The aim 
is to identify an information need and locate, evaluate, and use 
appropriate resources in keeping with academic integrity and 
ethical standards. Focus is on implementing effective strategies 
for finding relevant information—including selecting appropriate 
print and electronic sources and effectively using web search 
engines and the UMGC Library’s electronic resources to find 
information—and evaluating and correctly citing the information 
found. Students may not earn credit for LIBS 150 through chal-
lenge exam or portfolio credit and may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: COMP 111, LIBS 100, or LIBS 150.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
263
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Marketing 
MRKT 310 Marketing Principles (3)
A foundational study of the marketing principles followed to  
create, communicate, and deliver value for customers. Focus  
is on the pivotal role of value and customer satisfaction in mar-
keting. Discussion covers strategies, tactics, and all the major 
components of the marketing process. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: BMGT 350, MGMT 
322, MRKT 310, or TMGT 322.
MRKT 311 Digital Marketing Principles (3)
An introduction to the various types of digital marketing and 
the skills needed for each type. The aim is to recognize the 
various stages in the customer journey and marketing funnel. 
Discussions explore developing a unique value proposition and 
assessing the contribution of a SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, threats) analysis to a marketing plan. Projects 
involve developing a digital marketing plan that includes design-
ing a digital strategy to create and deliver value to consumers in 
a digital world.
MRKT 314 Nonprofit Marketing (3)
Prerequisite: MRKT 310. An overview of the key issues of mar-
keting in a nonprofit organization. The aim is to develop market-
ing plans that maximize exchange relationships with multiple 
stakeholders. Topics include the application of marketing-mix 
principles. Projects include researching and writing a grant pro-
posal. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: BMGT 398B or MRKT 314.
MRKT 354 Integrated Marketing Communications (3)
Prerequisite: MRKT 310 or MRKT 311. A study of the integration 
of marketing communication strategies to coordinate the mar-
keting mix’s components and achieve harmony in messages to 
customers and other stakeholders. Emphasis is on leveraging 
various digital tools to achieve customer-centered marketing 
communications objectives. Topics include various communi-
cation modalities e.g., digital media (including search, display, 
and social media), traditional advertising, personal selling, sales 
promotion, public relations, and direct marketing.
MRKT 356 Email Marketing (3)
Prerequisite: MRKT 310 or MRKT 311. A study of email market-
ing techniques as essential components of an effective market-
ing strategy. The goal is to design email marketing campaigns. 
Topics include the fundamental concepts of email marketing, 
legal and privacy regulations, email automation, and the evalua-
tion of success in email campaigns.
MRKT 394 Managing Customer Relationships  
in Digital Marketing (3)
Prerequisite: MRKT 310 or MRKT 311. An examination of cus-
tomer relationship management (CRM) from strategic, opera-
tional, and analytical perspectives through the engagement of 
marketing, sales, and customer service functions with prospec-
tive and acquired customers. The goal is to build customer 
relationships and business processes through effective CRM 
strategy development and execution. Topics include integrat-
ing people, technology, and analytics to effectively bring valued 
solutions and knowledge to customers and profitable relation-
ships to organizations.
MRKT 410 Consumer Behavior (3)
Prerequisite: MRKT 310. A study of the increasing importance 
of understanding consumers in the marketing system. The 
objective is to assess internal, external, and situational factors 
in developing marketing strategies; apply internal factors to 
market segmentation; and formulate marketing-mix strategies. 
Discussion covers the foundations of consumer behavior (such 
as economic, social, psychological, and cultural factors) and the 
influence of well-directed communications. Consumers are ana-
lyzed in marketing situations as buyers and users of products 
and services and in relation to the various social and marketing 
factors that affect their behavior. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: BMGT 451, CNEC 437,  
or MRKT 410.
MRKT 411 Consumer Behavior in Digital Media (3)
Prerequisite: MRKT 310 or MRKT 311. A study of consumer 
behavior covering what happens before, during, and after the 
point of purchase with an emphasis on the role of digital media. 
The objective is to gain insight into how digital media affects 
consumer choices and behavior. Discussion examines how con-
sumers interpret information received from different sources 
and how the opinions of other people and groups influence 
purchase decision-making. Topics include consumer behavior, 
persuasive communications in digital formats, data privacy, and 
consumer rights.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
264
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
MRKT 412 Marketing Research (3)
Prerequisite: MRKT 310 or MRKT 311. A study of the specialized 
field of marketing research as it is used to identify market needs, 
profile target markets, test promotional efforts, and measure the 
effectiveness of marketing plans. The goal is to assess market-
ing research needs, design and implement a marketing research 
plan, and use results to formulate marketing strategies. Discus-
sion covers procedures for planning survey projects, designing 
statistical samples, tabulating data, and preparing reports. 
Emphasis is on managing the marketing research function. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
BMGT 452 or MRKT 412.
MRKT 454 Global Marketing (3)
Prerequisite: MRKT 310. An in-depth study of marketing princi-
ples as they relate to the global marketplace. The aim is to apply  
marketing principles and strategies to a global organization and 
markets. Discussion covers the influence of internationalization 
on the U.S. economy, the competitive pressures on the intensi-
fying global markets, and the development of marketing plans 
tailored to reach international and global markets. Topics also 
include the political, economic, legal, regulatory, and sociocul-
tural trends affecting international marketing; the dynamic envi-
ronments in which global marketing strategies are formulated; 
and the challenge of implementing marketing programs leading 
to competitive advantage.
MRKT 458 Social Media Marketing (3)
Prerequisite: MRKT 310 or MRKT 311. An introduction to social 
media marketing to increase brand and product exposure and 
cultivate meaningful relationships with consumers. The aim 
is to engage with consumers to create an interactive, relevant 
conversation as part of a dynamic marketing strategy. Discus-
sions explore the current benefits and advantages of social 
media strategies and campaigns. Projects involve developing 
social media posts, using best practices for target markets, and 
evaluating successful campaigns.
MRKT 486A Workplace Learning in Marketing (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
MRKT 486B Workplace Learning in Marketing (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
MRKT 495 Strategic Marketing Management (3)
(Intended as a final, capstone course to be taken in a student’s 
last 15 credits.) Prerequisites: MRKT 354, MRKT 410, and MRKT 
412. A study of marketing that integrates knowledge gained 
through previous coursework and experience in marketing and 
builds on those concepts through integrative analysis, practical 
application, and critical thinking. The aim is to manage the mar-
keting process, perform root cause analysis, formulate alterna-
tive solutions, and propose marketing strategies and tactics. 
Emphasis is on the use of appropriate decision models. Topics 
include the analysis of consumers and markets. Discussion 
also covers emerging issues. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BMGT 457 or MRKT 495.
Mathematics 
MATH 105 Topics for Mathematical Literacy (3)
(For students who do not need a college algebra, statistics, or 
higher-level mathematics course. Meets the general education 
requirement in mathematics.) An investigation of contemporary 
topics in mathematics. The aim is to apply mathematical proc-
esses to solve problems involving exponential and logarithmic 
modeling, personal finance, probability, basic logical thinking, 
and statistical reasoning.
MATH 107 College Algebra (3)
(The first course in the two-course series MATH 107–MATH 
108. An alternative to MATH 115.) An introduction to equations 
and inequalities and a study of functions and their properties, 
including the development of graphing skills with polynomial, 
rational, exponential, and logarithmic functions. The objective is 
to apply appropriate technology and demonstrate fluency in the 
language of algebra; communicate mathematical ideas; perform 
operations on real numbers, complex numbers, and functions; 
solve equations and inequalities; analyze and graph circles and 
functions; and use mathematical modeling to translate, solve, 
and interpret applied problems. Technology is used for data 
modeling. Discussion also covers applications. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: MATH 107 
or MATH 115.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
265
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
MATH 108 Trigonometry and Analytical Geometry (3)
(The second course in the two-course series MATH 107–MATH 
108. An alternative to MATH 115.) Prerequisite: MATH 107. 
An introduction to trigonometric functions, identities, and 
equations and their applications. The goal is to demonstrate 
fluency in the language of trigonometry, analytic geometry, and 
selected mathematical topics; communicate mathematical 
ideas appropriately; apply and prove trigonometric identities; 
solve triangles and trigonometric equations; and perform vector 
operations. Discussion covers analytical geometry and conic 
sections, systems of linear equations, matrices, sequences, and 
series. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: MATH 108 or MATH 115.
MATH 115 Pre-Calculus (3)
(Not open to students who have completed MATH 140 or any 
course for which MATH 140 is a prerequisite.) An explication of 
equations, functions, and graphs. The goal is to demonstrate 
fluency in pre-calculus; communicate mathematical ideas 
appropriately; solve equations and inequalities; analyze and 
graph functions; and use mathematical modeling to translate, 
solve, and interpret applied problems. Topics include polynomi-
als, rational functions, exponential and logarithmic functions, 
trigonometry, and analytical geometry. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: MATH 107, MATH 
108, or MATH 115.
MATH 140 Calculus I (4)
Prerequisite: MATH 108 or MATH 115. An introduction to 
calculus. The goal is to demonstrate fluency in the language of 
calculus; discuss mathematical ideas appropriately; and solve 
problems by identifying, representing, and modeling functional 
relationships. Topics include functions, the sketching of graphs 
of functions, limits, continuity, derivatives and applications of 
the derivative, definite and indefinite integrals, and calculation 
of area. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: MATH 130, MATH 131, or MATH 140.
MATH 141 Calculus II (4)
(A continuation of MATH 140.) Prerequisite: MATH 140. A study 
of integration and functions. The aim is to demonstrate fluency 
in the language of calculus; discuss mathematical ideas appro-
priately; model and solve problems using integrals and interpret 
the results; and use infinite series to approximate functions to 
model real-world scenarios. Focus is on techniques of integra-
tion, improper integrals, and applications of integration (such as 
volumes, work, arc length, and moments); inverse, exponential, 
and logarithmic functions; and sequences and series. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: MATH 
131, MATH 132, or MATH 141.
MATH 241 Calculus III (4)
Prerequisite: MATH 141. An introduction to multivariable 
calculus. Exposition covers vectors and vector-valued func-
tions; partial derivatives and applications of partial derivatives 
(such as tangent planes and Lagrangian multipliers); multiple 
integrals; volume; surface area; and the classical theorems of 
Green, Stokes, and Gauss. The objective is to use multivariate 
calculus to solve real-world problems.
MATH 246 Differential Equations (3)
Prerequisite: MATH 141 or MATH 132. An introduction to the 
basic methods of solving differential equations. The goal is to 
demonstrate fluency in the language of differential equations; 
communicate mathematical ideas; solve boundary-value prob-
lems for first- and second-order equations; and solve systems 
of linear differential equations. Topics include solutions of 
boundary-value problems for first- and second-order differential 
equations; solutions of systems of linear differential equations; 
series solutions, existence, and uniqueness; and formulation 
and solution of differential equations for physical systems.
MATH 301 Concepts of Real Analysis I (3)
Prerequisite: MATH 141. A study of real analysis. The aim is  
to construct formal mathematical proofs and solve problems.  
Topics include sequences and series of numbers, continuity  
and differentiability of real-valued functions of one variable, the 
Riemann integral, sequences of functions, and power series.  
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: MATH 301 or MATH 410.
MATH 340 Linear Algebra (4)
Prerequisite: MATH 140. An examination of linear algebra. The 
aim is to demonstrate applications of various concepts in linear 
algebra. Topics include abstract vector spaces, linear transfor-
mations, algebra of matrices, determinants, similarity, eigen-
values and eigenvectors, and applications to systems of equa-
tions. Discussion also covers solutions of problems in physics, 
engineering, and the sciences. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: MATH 240, MATH 340, MATH 
400, or MATH 461.
MATH 402 Algebraic Structures (3)
Prerequisite: MATH 141. An overview of algebraic structures. 
The aim is to construct mathematically correct and concise 
proofs. Set theory, techniques of proofs, and the application of 
those techniques are introduced. Topics include groups, sub-
groups, isomorphisms, rings, integral domains, and fields.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
266
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
MATH 463 Complex Analysis (3)
Prerequisite: MATH 141. An overview of the theory and practice 
of complex variables to enrich the study of differential equations, 
real analysis, and numerical analysis. The aim is to use complex 
variables to analyze problems that have direct application to 
physical problems. Topics include complex numbers, functions, 
inverse functions, mappings, integrals, series, and poles in the 
complex numbers.
Music 
MUSC 210 Music as Cultural Expression (3)
A study of the role of music in various cultures. The objective 
is to identify key features that define various genres of world 
music, articulate the roles and functions of music in world cul-
tures, use the medium of music to explore intercultural relation-
ships, and consciously define personal musical perspectives. 
Discussion covers music from various cultural traditions and 
the contexts in which composers and musicians practice their 
craft. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: HUMN 211 or MUSC 210.
Natural Science 
NSCI 100 Introduction to Physical Science (3)
Prerequisite: MATH 105, STAT 200, or a higher MATH or STAT 
course. An introduction to the basic principles of physics and 
chemistry, with applications to geology, oceanography, meteo-
rology, and astronomy. The objective is to use scientific and 
quantitative reasoning to make informed decisions about topics 
related to physical science. Discussion covers the development 
of scientific thinking, the scientific method, the relationships 
among the various physical sciences, the role of the physical 
sciences in interpreting the natural world, and the integrated 
use of technology. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: GNSC 100, NSCI 100, or NSCI 103.
NSCI 101 Physical Science Laboratory (1)
(Fulfills the laboratory science requirement.) Prerequisite: 
MATH 105, STAT 200, or a higher MATH or STAT course. Prereq-
uisite or corequisite: NSCI 100. A laboratory study of the basic 
principles of physics and chemistry, with applications to geol-
ogy, oceanography, meteorology, and astronomy. The objective 
is to apply the scientific method and use scientific and quantita-
tive reasoning to make informed decisions about experimental 
results in the physical sciences. Discussion and laboratory 
activities cover the development of scientific thinking, the 
scientific method, the relationships among the various physical 
sciences, and the role of the physical sciences in interpreting 
the natural world.
NSCI 103 Fundamentals of Physical Science (4)
(Fulfills the laboratory science requirement.) Prerequisite: 
MATH 105, STAT 200, or a higher MATH or STAT course. An 
introduction to the basic principles of physics and chemistry, 
with applications to geology, oceanography, meteorology, and 
astronomy. The objective is to apply the scientific method and 
use scientific and quantitative reasoning to make informed 
decisions about experimental results in the physical sciences. 
Discussion and laboratory activities cover the development 
of scientific thinking, the scientific method, the relationships 
among the various physical sciences, the role of the physical 
sciences in interpreting the natural world, and the integrated 
use of technology. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: GNSC 100, NSCI 100, or NSCI 103.
NSCI 120 Natural Sciences Laboratory (1)
(Fulfills the laboratory science requirement.) Prerequisite: 
MATH 105, STAT 200, or a higher MATH or STAT course. A 
study of the basic principles of science investigation and obser-
vation. The objective is to apply knowledge of the natural world 
and experimental design to address questions about physical, 
chemical, geological, and ecological phenomena. Activities 
include observation of the natural world, experiments, measure-
ments, data collection, and quantitative reasoning exercises.
NSCI 170 Weather and Climate (3)
An introduction to the basic principles of atmospheric science. 
The goal is to use scientific and quantitative reasoning to 
make informed decisions about topics related to atmospheric 
science. Topics include the effect of different weather ele-
ments (such as temperature, pressure, winds, and humidity) on 
weather patterns and climate. Discussion also covers weather 
phenomena such as El Niño, thunderstorms, tornadoes, tropical 
cyclones, and midlatitude cyclones, as well as the impact of 
humans on Earth’s atmosphere. Students may receive credit  
for only one of the following courses: GNSC 170, GNSC 398D,  
or NSCI 170.
NSCI 171 Weather and Climate Laboratory (1)
(Fulfills the laboratory science requirement.) Prerequisite or 
corequisite: NSCI 170. An introduction to the basic concepts of 
meteorology. The aim is to apply the scientific method and use 
scientific and quantitative reasoning to make informed deci-
sions about experimental results in meteorology. Focus is on 
the observation, measurement, and analysis of weather data, 
including the interpretation of weather patterns and conditions 
found on weather maps, satellite images, radar imagery, and 
atmosphere diagrams. Students may receive credit for only  
one of the following courses: GNSC 171 or NSCI 171.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
267
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
NSCI 301 Laboratory Management and Safety (3)
Recommended: WRTG 112, WRTG 101, or WRTG 101S. An over-
view of the role of scientific methodology, data handling, and 
management practices in research and manufacturing labora-
tories. The aim is to examine scientific principles; research and 
development practices; safety and health compliance; and man-
agement of laboratory personnel, space, inventory, and equip-
ment. Assignments will address laboratory operating systems, 
finances and recordkeeping, safety regulations and procedures, 
data management, project planning, problem-solving, procure-
ment, personnel training, and communication with a broad array 
of stakeholders. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: GNSC 301, MEDT 301, or NSCI 301.
NSCI 362 Our Environment: Human Impact  
and Sustainable Choices (3)
A scientific examination of the impact humans have had on the 
global environment in the current era, the Anthropocene. The 
goal is to apply scientific reasoning to evaluate human impact 
on the environment and strategies to mitigate this impact. 
Topics address sustainability as it relates to individual choices, 
collective responsibility, environmental stewardship, energy use, 
diet, and consumer behavior. Current scientific research is used 
to explore environmental issues such as population growth, 
climate change, resource depletion, biodiversity losses, food 
security, and the economic implications of making sustainable 
choices. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: BEHS 361, BEHS 365, ENMT 365, GNSC 361, HUMN 
360, NSCI 361, or NSCI 362.
NSCI 398 Special Topics in Natural Science (3)
A study of topics in the sciences of special interest to students 
and faculty.
Nursing 
NURS 300 Science and Research in Nursing (3)
(Open only to students majoring in nursing for registered 
nurses.) An overview of the basic concepts of nursing research. 
The aim is to examine the contribution of research to nurs-
ing knowledge and practice, demonstrate skill in conducting 
research using available scientific literature, critically appraise 
current evidence-based research, and apply the findings to 
promote clinical best practices in nursing. Evidence-based 
research is evaluated from a legal and ethical perspective in the 
protection of human subjects. Topics include scientific process, 
research methods, experimental protocols, informed consent, 
evaluation of research literature, and ethical issues in research.
NURS 305 Informatics and Technology  
in Nursing Practice (3)
(Open only to students majoring in nursing for registered 
nurses.) Prerequisite or corequisite: NURS 300. An overview of 
the role of informatics and technology used in nursing practice. 
The aim is to demonstrate how informatics and technology are 
used to improve safety and outcomes for patients and health-
care organizations and analyze how informatics used in nursing 
practice is a combination of knowledge and skills from nursing 
science, computer science, information science, and cognitive 
science. Topics include health literacy, regulation, standard-
ization and security of patient data, implementation of health 
information systems, nursing ethics and informatics, and the role 
of nursing informatics in disaster preparedness.
NURS 350 Global Health Issues (3)
(Open only to students majoring in nursing for registered 
nurses.) Prerequisite: NURS 300. An exploration of global health 
issues and strategies that promote the health of nations. The 
aim is to explore global perspectives on health issues and poli-
cies and analyze how disparities in health and access to health-
care can influence the burden of disease. Discussion covers the 
global burden of disease, determinants of health, and factors 
that affect the health of countries. Topics include nutrition, 
maternal and child health, mental health, environmental health, 
communicable and noncommunicable diseases, and disaster/
emergency preparedness and response.
NURS 362 Health Assessment for Registered Nurses (4)
(Open only to students majoring in nursing for registered 
nurses.) Prerequisite: NURS 300. An overview of the role of the 
professional nurse in performing comprehensive health assess-
ments. The aim is to conduct comprehensive and holistic health 
assessments, recognize health deviations, formulate thorough 
individualized plans of care, and anticipate treatment outcomes. 
Focus is on demonstrating appropriate communication and 
interprofessional collaboration skills in promoting patient-
centered care. Topics include diversity, special populations, 
care across the lifespan, recognizing deviations in health, health 
promotion, and disease prevention. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: NURS 360 or NURS 362.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
268
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
NURS 410 Applying Evidence-Based Practice  
in Nursing (3)
(Open only to students majoring in nursing for registered nurses.) 
Prerequisite: NURS 300. A study of the principles and models of 
evidence-based nursing practice. The objective is to demonstrate 
critical-thinking skills in applying the findings of evidence-based 
practice to the clinical environment. Focus is on evaluating 
patient outcomes data to identify clinical practice areas that are 
amenable to quality improvement projects. Assignments include 
selecting a problem area of clinical practice and developing a 
proposal for a solution.
NURS 420 Advocacy and Politics in Nursing (3)
(Open only to students majoring in nursing for registered 
nurses.) Prerequisite: HMGT 372. An overview of the basic prin-
ciples involved with the legislative process and an examination 
of how nurses can use political advocacy strategies to influence 
healthcare policies. Focus is on applying interpersonal, commu-
nication, leadership, and advocacy skills to support the applica-
tion of social justice principles in healthcare delivery practices to 
diverse populations and promote the nursing profession.
NURS 462 Nursing Care of the Family and Community (4)
(Open only to students majoring in nursing for registered nurses.) 
Prerequisite: NURS 360 or NURS 362. An overview of the role of 
the professional nurse in the care of the family and community. 
Focus is on applying the nursing process to the care of families 
and communities. The goal is to identify health risks within a 
family and design a plan of care using evidence-based practices, 
obtain information about family and community health systems 
using systematic research practices, and develop a health 
promotion education plan for the community. Direct patient-care 
practice experiences include conducting a windshield survey and 
communicating and collaborating with community healthcare 
professionals in planning and implementing health promotion 
activities that address a community healthcare need. Topics 
include diversity, the community as a patient, environmental 
influences, families at risk, health promotion, risk reduction, 
vulnerable populations, disaster preparedness, and coalition 
building. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: NURS 460 or NURS 462.
NURS 485 Leadership and Management  
in Professional Nursing Practice (4)
(Open only to students majoring in nursing for registered nurses. 
Intended as a final, capstone course to be taken in a student’s 
last 9 credits.) Prerequisite: NURS 410. A study of leadership 
concepts, theories, and techniques used in the nursing profes-
sion to promote high-quality patient care in a variety of settings. 
The aim is to integrate nursing leadership concepts and theories 
into the various roles of the professional nurse, promote profes-
sional development for self and others, and apply business 
principles in the management of patients in complex and diverse 
healthcare environments. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: NURS 485 or NURS 495.
Nutrition 
NUTR 100 Elements of Nutrition (3)
A study of the scientific and quantitative foundations of the 
applied science of human nutrition. The goal is to understand 
how nutrition reflects an integration across scientific disciplines 
and how foods provide important nutrients that provide sub-
stance and energy for healthy living. Topics include scientific 
reasoning, healthy meal planning, and weight management. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
NUTR 100 or NUTR 200.
NUTR 101 Nutrition Laboratory (1)
(For students not majoring in biotechnology or laboratory 
management. Fulfills the laboratory science requirement only 
with previous or concurrent credit for NUTR 100.) Prerequisite or 
corequisite: NUTR 100. A hands-on study of human nutrition. The 
goal is to use an experimental approach to questions in nutrition 
science. Laboratory exercises emphasize critical thinking in the 
analysis of quantitative data derived from investigations into vari-
ous areas of nutrition science, including energy balance, macro- 
and micronutrients, food guidelines, and food safety.
Philosophy 
PHIL 100 Introduction to Philosophy (3)
An introduction to the literature, problems, and methods of 
philosophy. The goal is to identify and consider central, recurring 
problems of philosophy. Emphasis is on developing awareness 
of the significance of philosophical problems and learning to 
offer rationally justifiable solutions. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: HUMN 125 or PHIL 100.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
269
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
PHIL 348 Religions of the East (3)
An examination of South and East Asian religions, including the 
Jain, Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Confucian, Daoist, and Shinto tradi-
tions. The goal is to apply key methods in the academic study of 
religions to examine their geographical, historical, and cultural 
contexts. Topics include the religious meaning and social signifi-
cance of rituals, material culture, and written texts. Papers and 
presentations organize research findings, critical reflections, and 
creative perspectives. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: HUMN 348, HUMN 350, or PHIL 348.
PHIL 349 Religions of the West (3)
An examination of Western religions, including the Zoroastrian, 
Judaic, Christian, and Islamic traditions. The goal is to apply key 
methods in the academic study of religions to examine their geo-
graphical, historical, and cultural contexts. Topics include the reli-
gious meaning and social significance of rituals, material culture, 
and written texts. Papers and presentations organize research 
findings, critical reflections, and creative perspectives. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: HUMN 
350 or PHIL 349.
Physics
PHYS 121 Fundamentals of Physics I (4)
(For students majoring or minoring in a science; not appropriate 
for nonscience students fulfilling general education require-
ments. Fulfills the laboratory science requirement. Together  
with PHYS 122, generally satisfies the minimum requirement 
of medical and dental schools. Offered through the UMCP 
Science in the Evening Program; follows all UMCP schedules, 
prerequisites, and expectations. The first course in a two-course 
sequence.) Prerequisite: MATH 108, MATH 115, or knowledge of 
college-level trigonometry. An exploration of mechanics. Topics 
include kinematics, force, dynamics, conservation laws, and 
rotational motion.
PHYS 122 Fundamentals of Physics II (4)
(For students majoring or minoring in a science; not appropriate 
for nonscience students fulfilling general education require-
ments. Fulfills the laboratory science requirement. Together  
with PHYS 121, generally satisfies the minimum requirement of 
medical and dental schools. Offered through the UMCP Science 
in the Evening Program; follows all UMCP schedules, prerequi-
sites, and expectations. A continuation of PHYS 121.) Prereq-
uisite: PHYS 121. An exploration of the fields of heat, sound, 
electricity, magnetism, optics, and modern physics.
PHIL 110 Practical Reasoning (3)
An examination of methods for thinking analytically about real-
world problems and solving them. The goal is to apply logical 
arguments to practical decision-making. Topics include inductive 
and deductive reasoning; the properties of arguments; methods 
of logical analysis; synthesis of ideas; informal fallacies; and 
the role of presuppositions and other factors in scientific, social, 
ethical, and political problems.
PHIL 140 Introduction to Moral Philosophy  
and Ethical Reasoning (3)
An introductory exploration of Eastern and Western moral philos-
ophy and an examination of methods for thinking clearly about 
ethical issues. The objective is to employ a knowledge of moral 
theory and the methods of ethical reasoning to address contem-
porary ethical issues and dilemmas in areas such as business, 
medicine, information technology, and personal ethics. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: HUMN 
300 or PHIL 140.
PHIL 304 Contemporary Social Justice Issues (3)
An exploration of the political and ethical writings of philoso-
phers who shaped contemporary ideas of social justice and 
individual rights. The objective is to evaluate political theories 
and philosophies, defend ethical reasoning on issues of justice, 
and communicate critical reflections on contemporary social 
justice issues, such as environmental justice, healthcare, racial 
justice, women’s rights, immigration, and religious freedom. 
Topics include freedom and the social contract, individual and 
human rights, distributive and economic justice, gender and 
racial justice, internationalism, and theories of war.
PHIL 336 Ideas Shaping the 21st Century (3)
Recommended: PHIL 100 or PHIL 110. An exploration of the 
philosophical arguments concerning the ideas shaping human 
knowledge in the 21st century. The objective is to evaluate the 
ideas and arguments that shape human understanding of reality 
from antiquity to the 21st century, develop critical reflection of 
these ideas utilizing the tools of analytical philosophy, and com-
municate the results of philosophical and critical reflection in 
writing and oral presentation. Topics include analytical philoso-
phy, the human mind, consciousness, materialism, naturalism, 
and the limits of scientific realism. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: HUMN 336 or PHIL 336.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
270
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
PACE 111M Program and Career Exploration  
in Multidisciplinary Studies (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in research and 
computing literacy.) An orientation to UMGC and exploration of 
how UMGC academic programs align to professional goals and 
career options. Focus is on developing and practicing commu-
nication, teamwork, professionalism, and integrity skills while 
exploring ways to develop and enhance career opportunities. The 
aim is to become familiar with the university’s academic culture 
and expectations; learn about UMGC resources for success; 
reflect on academic and professional goals; and explore oppor-
tunities to shorten programs through transfer credit and other 
prior learning. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: PACE 111B, PACE 111C, PACE 111M, PACE 
111P, PACE 111S, or PACE 111T.
PACE 111P Program and Career Exploration  
in Public Safety (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in professional 
explorations.) An orientation to UMGC and exploration of how 
UMGC academic programs align to professional goals and 
career options. Focus is on practicing and improving commu-
nication, teamwork, professionalism, and integrity skills while 
exploring ways to develop and enhance career opportunities. 
The aim is to become familiar with the university’s academic 
culture and expectations, learn about UMGC resources for suc-
cess; reflect on academic and professional goals, and explore 
opportunities to shorten programs through transfer credit and 
other prior learning. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: PACE 111B, PACE 111C, PACE 111M, 
PACE 111P, PACE 111S, or PACE 111T.
PACE 111S Program and Career Exploration in Health 
and Sciences (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in research and 
computing literacy.) An orientation to UMGC and exploration of 
how UMGC academic programs align to professional goals and 
career options. Focus is on developing and practicing commu-
nication, teamwork, professionalism, and integrity skills while 
exploring ways to develop and enhance career opportunities. 
The aim is to become familiar with the university’s academic 
culture and expectations; learn about UMGC resources for suc-
cess; reflect on academic and professional goals; and explore 
opportunities to shorten programs through transfer credit and 
other prior learning. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: PACE 111B, PACE 111C, PACE 111M, 
PACE 111P, PACE 111S, or PACE 111T.
Professional Exploration 
PACE 100 Professional and Career Exploration  
for Transfer Students (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in professional explo-
rations for eligible transfer students with 60 or more credits in 
transfer.) A condensed orientation to UMGC and an exploration 
of how UMGC academic programs align to professional goals 
and career options. Focus is on exploring ways to develop and 
enhance career opportunities, becoming familiar with program 
options, and reflecting on personal goals. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: PACE 100, PACE 
111B, PACE 111C, PACE 111M, PACE 111P, PACE 111S,  
or PACE 111T.
PACE 111B Program and Career Exploration  
in Business (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in research and 
computing literacy.) An orientation to UMGC and exploration of 
how UMGC academic programs align to professional goals and 
career options. Focus is on developing and practicing commu-
nication, teamwork, professionalism, and integrity skills while 
exploring ways to develop and enhance career opportunities. The 
aim is to become familiar with the university’s academic culture 
and expectations; learn about UMGC resources for success; 
reflect on academic and professional goals; and explore oppor-
tunities to shorten programs through transfer credit and other 
prior learning. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: PACE 111B, PACE 111C, PACE 111M, PACE 
111P, PACE 111S, or PACE 111T.
PACE 111C Program and Career Exploration  
in Communication/Humanities (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in research and 
computing literacy.) An orientation to UMGC and exploration of 
how UMGC academic programs align to professional goals and 
career options. Focus is on developing and practicing commu-
nication, teamwork, professionalism, and integrity skills while 
exploring ways to develop and enhance career opportunities. The 
aim is to become familiar with the university’s academic culture 
and expectations; learn about UMGC resources for success; 
reflect on academic and professional goals; and explore oppor-
tunities to shorten programs through transfer credit and other 
prior learning. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: PACE 111B, PACE 111C, PACE 111M, PACE 
111P, PACE 111S, or PACE 111T.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
271
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
PSYC 251 Lifespan Development (3)
(Formerly PSYC 351.) Prerequisite: PSYC 100. An integrated 
study of the biological, socioemotional, and cognitive develop-
ment of humans from conception through death. The aim is to 
apply knowledge of lifespan development to interpersonal, com-
munity, and organizational relationships. Emphasis is on the 
interaction of nature and nurture on one’s physiology, capability, 
and potential at each progressive stage of development. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
PSYC 251 or PSYC 351.
PSYC 300 Research Methods in Psychology (3)
Prerequisites: PSYC 100 and STAT 200. A survey of research 
methods focusing on the fundamentals of research design and 
behavior. The aim is to apply research methodologies critically 
and creatively to communicate effectively about the domains 
of psychology. Topics include scientific writing using APA style, 
evaluation of research literature, and ethical issues in research. 
Practice is provided in asking research questions, formulating 
research hypotheses, designing and conducting a simulated 
research study, and presenting results. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: PSYC 300  
or PSYC 305.
PSYC 301 Biological Basis of Behavior (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. An introduction to the anatomical struc-
tures and physiological processes that determine behavior. The 
objective is to use scientifically valid resources to communicate 
effectively about the biological basis of behavior. Topics include 
the acquisition and processing of sensory information, the neu-
ral control of movement, and the biological bases of complex 
behaviors (such as sleep, learning, memory, sex, and language), 
as well as the basic functioning of the nervous system.
PSYC 306 Special Topics in Psychology (1–3)
Seminar discussion of topics of current interest. Areas explored 
may extend or augment those covered in more general topical 
courses. May be repeated to a maximum of 6 credits when  
topics differ.
PSYC 307 Special Topics in Biological Psychology (1–3)
Seminar discussion of topics of current interest. Areas explored 
may extend or augment those covered in more general topical 
courses. May be repeated to a maximum of 6 credits when  
topics differ.
PSYC 308 Special Topics in Social Psychology (1–3)
Seminar discussion of topics of current interest. Areas explored 
may extend or augment those covered in more general topical 
courses. May be repeated to a maximum of 6 credits when  
topics differ.
PACE 111T Program and Career Exploration  
in Technology (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in research and 
computing literacy.) An orientation to UMGC and exploration of 
how UMGC academic programs align to professional goals and 
career options. Focus is on developing and practicing commu-
nication, teamwork, professionalism, and integrity skills while 
exploring ways to develop and enhance career opportunities. The 
aim is to become familiar with the university’s academic culture 
and expectations; learn about UMGC resources for success; 
reflect on academic and professional goals; and explore oppor-
tunities to shorten programs through transfer credit and other 
prior learning. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: PACE 111B, PACE 111C, PACE 111M, PACE 
111P, PACE 111S, or PACE 111T.
Psychology 
PSYC 100 Introduction to Psychology (3)
A survey of the basic principles, research concepts, and 
problems in psychological science. The biological, cognitive, 
and social perspectives of human thought and behavior are 
addressed. The goal is to apply major concepts and use the 
scientific method to enhance the understanding of individual, 
community, and organizational life experiences. Topics include 
neuroscience, sensation and perception, learning and condition-
ing, memory, motivation, language and intelligence, personality 
and social behavior, and psychopathology and therapy. Applica-
tions of psychology are also presented. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: BEHS 101  
or PSYC 100.
PSYC 220 Social Psychology (3)
(Formerly PSYC 321.) Prerequisite: PSYC 100. An examination 
of the influence of social factors on individual and interpersonal 
behaviors. The objective is to analyze how thoughts, feelings, 
and behaviors are affected by the presence of others (actual or 
imagined). Topics include the self, social perception, social cog-
nition and information processing, relationships, attitudes, social 
influence, and group behavior. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BEHS 221, BEHS 421, BEHS 
450, PSYC 220, PSYC 221, or PSYC 321.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
272
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
PSYC 353 Abnormal Psychology (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. An examination of mental disorders 
across the lifespan. The goal is to evaluate emerging issues 
in abnormal psychology. Topics include the identification and 
diagnosis of specific disorders and the evolution of treatment 
protocols. Students may receive credit for only one of the fol-
lowing courses: PSYC 331, PSYC 353, or PSYC 431.
PSYC 354 Cross-Cultural Psychology (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. An examination of the interplay of 
individual, ethnic, and cultural factors in psychosocial growth 
and well-being. The objective is to use theory, research, and the 
practiced utilization of cultural factors to understand identity 
development, communication, social institutions and norms, 
health and well-being, cross-cultural interpersonal relations, 
and cultural humility and competence. Issues of globalization, 
diversity, cultural bias, and intersectionality are addressed.
PSYC 386 Psychology of Stress (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. An examination of the forces that 
define and determine the stress response. The aim is to apply 
stress management techniques to remediate the negative 
impact of stress. Stress is studied as the product of the interac-
tions among one’s social structure, occupational status, and 
psychological and physiological levels of well-being. The psy-
chological perspective is examined in relation to the stresses 
produced in a variety of contexts, such as families and work 
organizations. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: BEHS 463, HLTH 285, or PSYC 386.
PSYC 432 Introduction to Counseling Psychology (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. Recommended: PSYC 300 and PSYC 
335. A survey and critical analysis of research and intervention 
strategies developed and used by counseling psychologists. The 
goal is to evaluate current trends in content and methodology. 
Topics include counseling protocols in various applied settings.
PSYC 436 Introduction to Clinical Psychology (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. A survey of the field of clinical psychol-
ogy as a distinct mental health discipline. The objective is to 
evaluate current trends in content and methodology. Topics 
include the history of the field, diagnostic and therapeutic 
strategies employed by clinical psychologists, ethical issues, 
and working with diverse populations. Emphasis is on the 
scientist-practitioner model and the critical analysis of theories 
and empirical research.
PSYC 309 Special Topics in Professional  
Psychology (1–3)
Seminar discussion of topics of current interest. The goal is to 
attain specialized knowledge in a particular area of professional 
psychology. Topics may extend or augment those covered in 
more general courses. May be repeated to a maximum of 6 cred-
its when topics differ.
PSYC 310 Sensation and Perception (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. A survey of theories and historical and 
contemporary research in how the auditory, visual, gustatory, 
olfactory, kinesthetic, and tactile senses acquire information 
and how psychological, anatomical, physiological, and envi-
ronmental factors help us perceive the world. The objective is 
to apply an understanding of complex neural and behavioral 
processes to evaluate research and analyze variations within 
and between species.
PSYC 332 Psychology of Human Sexuality (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. An examination of human sexuality 
and sexual behavior. The objective is to apply knowledge of the 
physiology and psychology of human sexuality. Topics include 
sexual anatomy, intimate relationships, sexual health, and sexual 
identity across the lifespan. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: BEHS 363, HLTH 377, or PSYC 332.
PSYC 335 Theories of Personality (3)
(Formerly PSYC 435.) Prerequisite: PSYC 100. A study of major 
theories and perspectives on personality. The goal is to explain 
and evaluate major concepts in personality. Topics include trait, 
psychodynamic, behavioral, and humanistic theories. Methods 
of personality research and relevant findings are also intro-
duced. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: PSYC 335 or PSYC 435.
PSYC 338 Psychology of Gender (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. A survey of the biology, lifespan devel-
opment, socialization, personality attributes, mental health 
factors, and special considerations associated with gender. The 
aim is to apply knowledge of cultural and historical influences 
relating to gender. Topics include conceptions of gender, gender 
roles, and gender similarities and differences.
PSYC 341 Memory and Cognition (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. An introduction to basic models, meth-
ods of research, and findings in the fields of memory, problem-
solving, and language. The objective is to apply knowledge of 
cognitive processes to a variety of situations, including organi-
zational and educational settings. Both applications and theory 
are explored.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
273
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
PSAD 408 Public Safety Legal Issues  
and Public Policy (3)
Recommended: PSAD 304. A review of the U.S legal system 
and an analysis of the law as it relates to the administration of 
public safety organizations. Principles of legal obligations, limi-
tations, liabilities, and immunities are examined and discussed, 
both in general terms and, where applicable, in terms of how 
they differ in the treatment of public employers and employees. 
The objective is to develop an appreciation of the legal respon-
sibilities of a public safety administrator to their employees and 
the public at large.
PSAD 410 Public Safety Research and Technology (3)
Recommended: PSAD 304. An examination of research and the 
applications of technology in public safety administration. The 
goal is to describe the principles of scientific research; evalu-
ate existing research and technology; and apply the methods 
and resources of research, science, and technology to public 
safety administration. Topics include scientific research, 
research methodology, technology, and the evaluation and use 
of research and technology in public safety administration.
PSAD 414 Public Safety Administration Ethics (3)
Recommended: PSAD 304. An in-depth examination of ethics 
and ethical issues in public safety administration. The aim is to 
recognize the principles of ethical decision-making and those 
factors that tend to undermine their application and those that 
tend to support them. Topics include the most well-known 
ethical systems, values and empathy, moral disengagement, 
ethical decision-making and ethical leadership, and deception 
as viewed through the lens of ethical responsibility.
PSAD 416 Public Safety Leadership (3)
Recommended: PSAD 304. A study of leadership theories, 
skills, and techniques used in public safety administration. The 
objective is to define and explain basic concepts of leadership; 
analyze personal leadership knowledge, skills, and abilities; and 
evaluate leadership performance in the current public safety 
environment. Topics include leadership, leadership theories and 
styles, leadership roles, leadership performance, individual lead-
ership skills and plans, effective leadership, and future trends.
PSAD 486A Workplace Learning in Public Safety 
Administration (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
PSYC 437 Positive Psychology (3)
Prerequisite: PSYC 100. A survey of the science of positive 
psychology. The aim is to analyze and evaluate theories and 
applications of positive psychology. Focus is on the unique 
characteristics of the human experience that contribute to 
health and well-being. Topics include hope, optimism, human 
strengths, happiness, flow, and attachment.
PSYC 495 Psychology Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: PSYC 100, PSYC 300, and completion of all require-
ments for the psychology major. A study of psychology that 
integrates knowledge gained through previous coursework and 
experience. The aim is to build on that conceptual foundation 
through case study, reflective essays, and portfolio development.
Public Safety 
Administration 
PSAD 302 Introduction to Public Safety Administration (3)
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An introduction to public 
safety organizations and the functions of administrators within 
these organizations. The objective is to identify key functions  
of public safety administration and describe the history and  
current forces and trends facing public safety administrators. 
The history, development, growth, and future of various inter-
dependent public safety entities are examined from an inter-
disciplinary perspective. Topics include key responsibilities of 
administrators in public safety administration.
PSAD 304 Contemporary Public Safety Practices (3)
Recommended: PSAD 302. An investigation of contemporary 
strategic public safety practices. The goal is to explore several 
best practices generally associated with successful organiza-
tions and apply them to the field of public safety. Topics include 
the role of hazard and risk management, quality control, and 
customer service in public safety organizations. Discussion 
also covers contemporary views of public safety integration  
and consolidation, as well as public and private partnerships.
PSAD 306 Public Safety Planning (3)
Recommended: PSAD 304. An examination of strategic, 
operational, and tactical planning in public safety administra-
tion with an emphasis on the planning process. The aim is to 
demonstrate key skills in public safety planning by successfully 
developing a hazards mitigation plan. Topics include strategic, 
operational, and tactical planning, as well as resource allocation 
and hazards mitigation.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
274
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
SOCY 309 Social Demography (3)
(Formerly SOCY 410.) Prerequisite: SOCY 100. A study of social 
demography. The goal is to identify, evaluate, and interpret key 
demographic concepts and develop an understanding of global 
population dynamics. Topics include types of demographic  
analysis, demographic data, population characteristics, migra-
tion, mortality, fertility, population theories, world population 
growth, and population policy. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: SOCY 309 or SOCY 410.
SOCY 313 The Individual and Society (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. A sociological examination of how 
individuals shape and are shaped by society. The objective is 
to analyze and communicate how the individual self is molded 
through social forces and how individuals contribute to the 
continuous creation of society, using micro-level sociological 
theories and concepts. Discussions will apply sociological 
concepts and theories to examine interpersonal relations, group 
processes, identity, and social change. Topics include the influ-
ence of social inequality on identity, the social aspects of emo-
tion management, interpersonal conflict and cooperation, and 
workplace interactions. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: BEHS 312, SOCY 311, or SOCY 313.
SOCY 325 The Sociology of Gender (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. An inquiry into how gender is socially 
constructed and reconstructed in contemporary society. The  
aim is to assess the interaction between gender and other  
social identities.
SOCY 350 Contemporary Social Problems (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. An advanced examination of various 
local, national, and global problems that affect societies. The 
aim is to apply sociological perspectives and research to ana-
lyze the process by which social conditions become recognized 
as social problems and are resolved by various actors. Topics 
include the subjective/objective aspects of social problems, 
claims about social problems in the media, and how sociolo-
gists can help inform possible solutions to social problems. Dis-
cussion also covers problems related to human rights, violence, 
social isolation/loneliness, and social inequality. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: SOCY 105, 
SOCY 210, or SOCY 350.
SOCY 398 Special Topics in Sociology (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. A study of topics of special interest. 
May be repeated to a maximum of 6 credits when topics differ.
PSAD 486B Workplace Learning in Public Safety 
Administration (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
PSAD 495 Public Safety Leadership Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: PSAD 306, PSAD 408, PSAD 410, PSAD 414, and 
PSAD 416. An intensive study of public safety administration that 
integrates knowledge gained through previous coursework and 
builds on that foundation through integrative analysis, practical 
application, and critical thinking. Focus is on using these skills 
to address the challenges of current and future issues in public 
safety administration. The aim is to integrate leadership, admin-
istration, and management concepts and apply them to current 
public safety issues. Assignments include the development of a 
comprehensive case study related to a current public safety issue.
Sociology 
SOCY 100 Introduction to Sociology (3)
An introduction to the basic concepts, theoretical perspectives, 
and research methods in sociology. The objective is to apply 
sociological imagination, perspectives, and research to uncover 
patterns of social behavior and identify their consequences. Top-
ics include culture, socialization, groups, deviance, stratification, 
institutions, and social change. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BEHS 102 or SOCY 100.
SOCY 300 American Society (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. An in-depth examination of American 
society and what it means to be American from a sociologi- 
cal perspective. Discussion explores past and current values,  
ideals, and norms and applies sociological theories to analyze 
the ways that these values, ideals, and norms have shaped 
aspects of American social life, such as politics, consumerism, 
popular culture, social stratification, economics, diversity, educa-
tion, religion, and social change. The objective is to identify and 
describe various aspects of social and cultural change to  
better understand American society.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
275
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
SOCY 423 Race and Ethnicity: A Global Perspective (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. An advanced examination of race and 
ethnicity in a variety of social and cultural contexts across the 
globe. The aim is to apply sociological theories and concepts 
to understand how race and ethnicity are constructed; how 
prejudice develops; the ways in which structural racism mani-
fests in society; the social effects of migration and immigration; 
the global outcomes of slavery and genocide; and how social 
movements seek to effect change for a more equitable society. 
Topics include theories of prejudice transmission and reduction, 
critical race theory, and global consequences of structural racism 
related to climate change and health.
SOCY 426 Sociology of Religion (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. Recommended: BEHS 220 or HUMN 
350. An advanced examination of religion from a sociological 
perspective. The aim is to evaluate the influence of social loca-
tion on religious beliefs and attitudes; examine relationships 
between church and state; and analyze current religious conflicts 
and controversies. Topics include fundamentalism versus 
extremism; modernity; religious conflicts; and the relationship of 
religion with race, class, gender, sexuality, and politics.
SOCY 428 Migrants and Refugees (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. An advanced sociological study of inter-
national, global, and economic issues regarding migrants and 
refugees, addressing population movements to and from coun-
tries. The objective is to analyze data and historical evidence 
and assess the role of globalization on migration. Topics include 
migrants and refugees, immigration, the role of conflict in migra-
tion, politics and laws regarding migrants and refugees, and the 
role of globalization in generating population flows.
SOCY 443 Sociology of the Family (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. An advanced examination of the family 
in society. The goal is to analyze, communicate, and project 
trends regarding family structures and outcomes through the 
application of major sociological perspectives. Discussions will 
use sociological research to describe some of the following: 
changing definitions of family; demographic trends in marriage 
and family patterns; social dynamics within families; and the 
effects of technology on family relationships. Topics include 
single parenting, blended families, cultural differences among 
families, changes in families over the life course, and govern-
mental policies regarding families.
SOCY 462 Women in the Military (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. An advanced examination of women in 
the military from a sociological perspective. The objective is to 
understand gender, power, and the changing roles of women in 
the military; assess how policies affect women in the military; 
examine military, community, and family support systems for 
military women; and compare the roles and duties of women in 
the U.S. armed forces in war and peacetime with those of military 
women in other countries. Topics include the social construc-
tion of gender and sexuality of the armed forces; the history of 
women in the military; violence against women in the military; 
rank, status, and advancement of women in the military; and 
postmilitary transitions and career options for women.
SOCY 473 Cities and Communities (3)
Prerequisite: SOCY 100. An advanced sociological study of  
cities and the urban landscape. The aim is to apply major  
sociological theories to investigate interdependencies between 
social action, urbanization, and the environment. Focus is on 
current issues relevant to the challenge of building livable and 
sustainable cities. Topics include urban social networks, subur-
banization, social problems of urbanization, and urban planning 
and policies.
SOCY 486A Workplace Learning in Sociology (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
SOCY 486B Workplace Learning in Sociology (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
276
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
SDEV 360 Secure Software Engineering (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 215. An in-depth study of the processes, 
standards, and regulations associated with secure software engi-
neering. The objective is to plan, manage, document, and com-
municate all phases of a secure software development cycle. 
Topics include security requirements, secure software life cycle 
development, threat modeling, and Security Technical Implemen-
tation Guides (STIGs).
SDEV 400 Secure Programming in the Cloud (3)
Prerequisite: SDEV 300. A hands-on study of programming 
secure applications in the cloud. The goal is to design and  
build applications in the cloud while implementing appropriate 
security policies. Topics include cloud computing models,  
risks and security challenges of programming in the cloud,  
and data security.
SDEV 425 Mitigating Software Vulnerabilities (3)
Prerequisites: SDEV 325 and SDEV 360. An in-depth analysis and 
evaluation of the mitigation of software vulnerabilities. The aim 
is to detect and mitigate software vulnerabilities by evaluating 
code. Topics include language-specific software vulnerabilities, 
mitigation, and input validation.
SDEV 455 Risk Analysis and Threat Modeling (3)
Prerequisite: SDEV 360. An examination of the risks and threats 
associated with application development. The objective is to 
identify valuable assets, create system architecture diagrams, 
decompose applications, identify and prioritize threats, and docu-
ment results in a threat model. Topics include security require-
ments and objectives, threat identification and mitigation, and 
calculating risk.
SDEV 460 Software Security Testing (3)
Prerequisite: SDEV 425. A hands-on study of exploits, attacks, 
and techniques used to penetrate application security defenses 
and strategies for mitigating such attacks. The objective is to 
apply appropriate methodologies for software penetration testing 
to identify application weaknesses and logic flaws and to test 
and create scripts for exploitation and discovery. Topics include 
web architecture, application infrastructure, reconnaissance, 
discovery, mapping, and exploitation.
SDEV 486A Workplace Learning in  
Software Development (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
Software Development 
and Security 
Courses in software development and security (designated 
SDEV) have higher computing requirements than the minimum 
technical requirements stated on p. 26. They require an Intel 
Core i7 processor or higher, with speeds of 2GHz  
and at least 8GB RAM (16GB recommended).
SDEV 300 Building Secure Python Applications (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 215. A hands-on study of best practices and 
strategies for building secure Python desktop and web applica-
tions. The objective is to design and build Python applications 
that are resistant to common security threats. Topics include 
syntax, data structures, style guides, data munging, web appli- 
cation frameworks, and the use of secure coding tools and  
processes to guard against application vulnerabilities.
SDEV 325 Detecting Software Vulnerabilities (3)
Prerequisites: CMSC 320 and SDEV 300. An in-depth, practical 
application of techniques and tools for detecting and document-
ing software vulnerabilities and risks. The goal is to research, 
select, and use software to analyze code and isolate and priori-
tize application code and processes that could lead to failure  
or compromise data integrity or privacy. Topics include the  
top 25 software vulnerabilities, secure coding guidelines, static 
code analysis, and software assurance metrics.
SDEV 350 Database Security (3)
Prerequisite: CMSC 320. A study of processes and techniques 
for securing databases. The objective is to design, build, and 
maintain databases to minimize risks and security attacks. 
Topics include privileges and roles, user accounts, encryption, 
authentication methods, and auditing.
SDEV 355 Securing Mobile Apps (3)
Prerequisite: SDEV 325. A hands-on study of best practices for 
designing and building secure mobile applications. The aim is to 
formulate proper defenses and processes to mitigate common 
attacks. Focus is on mobile device infrastructure, security mod-
els, and mobile applications. Topics include code analysis, risk 
modeling, native and web mobile applications security, secure 
mobile communication, and back-end application attacks  
and counterattacks.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
277
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
SPAN 212 Intermediate Spanish II (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. Prerequisite: SPAN 211 or appropri-
ate score on a placement test. Further intermediate-level study 
of the Spanish language. The objective is to listen to, speak, read, 
and write Spanish and interact effectively with native speakers 
in a variety of personal and professional settings in culturally 
appropriate ways. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: SPAN 115, SPAN 202, or SPAN 212.
SPAN 311 Advanced Spanish I (3)
Prerequisite: SPAN 212 or appropriate score on a placement test. 
An in-depth review and expansion of Spanish language commu-
nication skills. The aim is to express opinions and use narration 
and description in a variety of personal and professional con-
texts. Focus is on improving linguistic proficiency while increas-
ing cultural awareness. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: SPAN 301 or SPAN 311.
SPAN 314 Modern Spanish-Speaking Cultures (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional syn-
chronous work required. Prerequisite: SPAN 212 or appropriate 
score on a placement test. An overview of the diverse cultures 
that constitute the Spanish-speaking world, taught entirely in 
Spanish. The objective is to foster intercultural communication 
skills, recognize aspects of Spanish-speaking cultures and their 
significance to global and American society, and employ strate-
gies to enhance language development and cultural awareness. 
Discussion covers the social, historical, and political experi-
ences of the Spanish-speaking people of Latin America, Spain, 
and the United States.
SPAN 418 Business Spanish I (4)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Formerly SPAN 318.) Prerequisite: 
Any 300-level SPAN course or appropriate score on a placement 
test. An exploration of business contexts and practices in the 
Spanish-speaking world, taught entirely in Spanish. The objec-
tive is to use knowledge of diverse business cultures to commu-
nicate and interact effectively in a business environment. Topics 
include contemporary economic conditions in various Spanish-
speaking areas (including those within the United States), 
enterprise, management, human resources, and cultural issues 
that influence the workplace. Assignments include preparing a 
job-search portfolio and making a business presentation, both in 
Spanish. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: SPAN 315, SPAN 318, or SPAN 418.
SDEV 486B Workplace Learning in  
Software Development (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
Spanish 
SPAN 111 Elementary Spanish I (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional syn-
chronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of Span-
ish; assumes no prior knowledge of Spanish. Students with prior 
experience with the Spanish language should take a placement 
test to assess appropriate level.) An introduction to the Span-
ish language. The objective is to listen to, speak, read, and write 
elementary Spanish in concrete, real-life situations and in cultur-
ally appropriate ways. The diverse language and culture of the 
Spanish-speaking world is explored. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: SPAN 101 or SPAN 111.
SPAN 112 Elementary Spanish II (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. (Not open to native speakers of 
Spanish.) Prerequisite: SPAN 111 or appropriate score on a 
placement test. A continued introduction to the Spanish lan-
guage. The goal is to listen to, speak, read, and write Spanish in 
concrete, real-life situations and in culturally appropriate ways. 
The diverse language and culture of the Spanish-speaking world 
is explored. Students may receive credit for only one of the fol-
lowing courses: SPAN 102 or SPAN 112.
SPAN 211 Intermediate Spanish I (3)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. Prerequisite: SPAN 112 or appropri-
ate score on a placement test. An intermediate-level study of 
the Spanish language. The aim is to improve listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing skills in Spanish and apply them in a variety 
of real-life situations and social contexts in culturally appropriate 
ways. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: SPAN 114, SPAN 201, or SPAN 211.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
278
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
SPCH 125 Introduction to Interpersonal  
Communication (3)
(Fulfills the prerequisite for all upper-level SPCH courses.) An 
exploration of the role interpersonal communication plays in our 
personal and professional lives. The aim is to apply theoretical 
frameworks and key concepts in communication to personal 
behavior and personal and professional contexts. Topics include 
self-identity, perception, listening, verbal and nonverbal commu-
nication, relationship development, and conflict management.
SPCH 324 Communication and Gender (3)
Prerequisite: Any SPCH course or COMM 300. An investiga-
tion of how communication influences gender and how gender 
affects communication. The objective is to apply theoretical 
frameworks and key concepts of gender to contexts, situations, 
and messages. Discussion covers gender roles, gender varia-
tion across communication styles, and the role gender plays in 
personal and professional relationships, as well as its role in 
culture and the media.
SPCH 470 Effective Listening (3)
Prerequisite: Any SPCH course or COMM 300. An exploration 
of the complexities of message reception and interpretation 
as related to personal growth, social relationships, and profes-
sional development. The goal is to assess and modify listening 
practices. Topics include the role of listening in communication, 
types of listening, and listening skills for specific contexts.
SPCH 472 Nonverbal Communication (3)
Prerequisite: Any SPCH course or COMM 300. A comprehensive 
investigation of nonverbal communication in human interaction.  
The aim is to analyze the impact of nonverbal messages on inter-
personal, organizational, and public communication. Emphasis is 
on hands-on application of principles and practices to real-world 
situations. Topics include foundations of interpersonal attrac-
tion, use and abuse of personal space, and cross-cultural and 
gendered behaviors.
SPCH 482 Intercultural Communication (3)
Prerequisite: Any SPCH course or COMM 300. An examination 
of the major variables of communication in an intercultural 
context. The objective is to develop and apply communication 
strategies. Topics include cultural, racial, and national differ-
ences; stereotypes; values; cultural assumptions; and verbal 
and nonverbal channels.
SPAN 419 Business Spanish II (4)
For online sections, microphone, speakers, and occasional 
synchronous work required. Prerequisite: Any 300-level SPAN 
course or appropriate score on a placement test. A continued 
exploration of business conditions and practices in the Spanish-
speaking world, taught entirely in Spanish. The goal is to use 
knowledge of diverse business cultures to communicate and 
interact effectively in a business environment in Spanish. Topics 
include contemporary economic conditions in various Spanish-
speaking areas (including areas within the United States), mar-
keting, investments, finances, logistics, and cultural issues that 
influence the market. Projects include preparation of a business 
proposal portfolio and a professional presentation with a peer 
review, both in Spanish.
SPAN 486A Workplace Learning in Spanish (3)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
SPAN 486B Workplace Learning in Spanish (6)
Prerequisites: 9 credits in the discipline and prior program 
approval (requirements detailed online at umgc.edu/wkpl). The 
integration of discipline-specific knowledge with new experi-
ences in the work environment. Tasks include completing a 
series of academic assignments that parallel work experiences.
Speech Communication
SPCH 100 Foundations of Oral Communication (3)
For online sections, access to a broadband internet connec-
tion, use of a digital camera capable of recording 10-minute 
videos, and the ability to save and transfer video to a hosting 
site required. (Fulfills the prerequisite for all upper-level SPCH 
courses.) An introduction to oral communication, with emphasis 
on interpersonal communication, small-group communication, 
and public speaking. The objective is to prepare speeches, pro-
vide feedback to others, and participate in group activities. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
SPCH 100, SPCH 100X, SPCH 101, SPCH 107, or SPCH 108.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
279
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Women’s Studies 
WMST 200 Introduction to Women, Gender,  
and Sexuality Studies (3)
An interdisciplinary study of the status, roles, and experiences 
of women in contemporary society. The aim is to recognize the 
impact of gender in all academic disciplines; analyze politi-
cal, economic, social, and cultural issues through a feminist 
lens; and apply knowledge of local and global issues to affect 
positive change in women’s lives. Discussion covers women’s 
experiences across geography and history. Topics include 
gender and other identities, systems of privilege and inequality, 
sexuality, and power relations.
Writing 
WRTG 111 Academic Writing I (3)
(The first course in the two-course series WRTG 111–WRTG 
112. Fulfills the general education requirement in communica-
tions.) An introduction to reading, writing, and critical thinking 
in an academic setting. The goal is to practice strategies for 
understanding academic texts and for developing one’s ideas 
in relation to those texts. Focus is on writing thesis-driven 
essays that incorporate ideas and information from sources and 
demonstrate critical thinking, proper attribution, and effective 
language use. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: WRTG 100A, WRTG 111, or WRTG 111X.
WRTG 112 Academic Writing II (3)
(The second course in the two-course series WRTG 111– 
WRTG 112. Fulfills the general education requirement in com-
munications.) Continued practice in reading, writing, and critical 
thinking with an emphasis on research and argumentation. The 
goal is to implement strategies for analyzing ideas and rhetori-
cal techniques in academic texts and for conducting academic 
research. Focus is on writing an argumentative research paper 
that synthesizes information and ideas from multiple sources 
and demonstrates critical thinking, varied rhetorical strategies, 
proper source documentation, and effective language use. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
ENGL 101, ENGL 101X, WRTG 101, WRTG 101S, WRTG 101X, 
WRTG 112, or WRTG 112X.
Statistics and Probability 
STAT 200 Introduction to Statistics (3)
An introduction to statistics. The objective is to assess the 
validity of statistical conclusions; organize, summarize, 
interpret, and present data using graphical and tabular repre-
sentations; and apply principles of inferential statistics. Focus 
is on selecting and applying appropriate statistical tests and 
determining reasonable inferences and predictions from a set of 
data. Topics include methods of sampling; percentiles; con-
cepts of probability; probability distributions; normal, t-, and chi-
square distributions; confidence intervals; hypothesis testing of 
one and two means; proportions; binomial experiments; sample 
size calculations; correlation; regression; and analysis of vari-
ance (ANOVA). Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: BEHS 202, BEHS 302, BMGT 230, ECON 321, 
GNST 201, MATH 111, MGMT 316, PSYC 200, SOCY 201, STAT 
100, STAT 200, STAT 225, or STAT 230.
STAT 400 Applied Probability and Statistics (3)
Prerequisite: MATH 141. An intermediate study of statistical 
and probabilistic theory. The aim is to apply quantitative tools 
for decision-making and interpret statistical results in profes-
sional literature and the media. Topics include random variables, 
standard distributions, sampling methods, law of large numbers 
and the Central Limit Theorem, moments, estimations of param-
eters, and testing of hypotheses.
Theatre 
THET 110 Introduction to the Theatre (3)
An introduction to the experience of the theatre. The objective is 
to gain a historical perspective and critically appraise dramatic 
content in performing arts. Emphasis is on engaging with 
theatrical performances as informed audience members and 
assessing one’s role within the script-performance-audience 
dynamic. Assignments include attendance at two live profes-
sional performances. Students may receive credits for only one 
of the following courses: HUMN 110 or THET 110.
COURSE INFORMATION  
UNDERGRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
280
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
WRTG 394 Advanced Business Writing (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in upper-level 
advanced writing.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. A 
comprehensive, project-based study of applied business writ-
ing. The aim is to develop documents appropriate to audience 
and purpose that are well argued and conform to standards to 
business writing. Topics include context, purpose, audience, 
style, organization, format, results, technologies, and strategies 
for persuasion in typical workplace messages. In addition to 
shorter assignments, a substantial formal report that incorpo-
rates research and support for conclusions or recommenda-
tions is required. Students may receive credit for only one of  
the following courses: COMM 394/394X, ENGL 394/394X, or 
WRTG 394/394X. 
WRTG 291 Research Writing (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications.) 
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. Continued practice in crit-
ical reading, thinking, and writing skills. The objective is to ana-
lyze, evaluate, and synthesize diverse sources and viewpoints 
to develop persuasive and academic writing projects. Assign-
ments include prewriting exercises, an annotated bibliography, a 
synthesis research essay, and a reflective paper. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: ENGL 291, 
ENGL 291H, or WRTG 291.
WRTG 293 Introduction to Professional Writing (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in communications.) 
Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. An overview of profes-
sional writing. The goal is to analyze professional communica-
tion scenarios to develop effective workplace writing. Topics 
include the standards, conventions, and technologies of profes-
sional writing; communicating to a variety of audiences; and 
developing appropriate written responses to workplace chal-
lenges. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: COMM 293, ENGL 293, or WRTG 293.
WRTG 391 Advanced Research Writing (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in upper-level 
advanced writing.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. 
Instruction and practice in academic research skills. The objec-
tive is to critically analyze scholarly and other credible sources 
and effectively integrate source material into a complex argu-
ment. Emphasis is placed on synthesizing multiple sources in 
producing a literature review on a focused topic. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: ENGL 391, 
ENGL 391X, WRTG 391, or WRTG 391X.
WRTG 393 Advanced Technical Writing (3)
(Fulfills the general education requirement in upper-level 
advanced writing.) Prerequisite: WRTG 112 or equivalent. 
Recommended: WRTG 291 or WRTG 293. A comprehensive, 
project-based study of applied technical writing. The aim is to 
design and develop appropriate and effective technical docu-
ments using strategies and technologies for a variety of audi-
ences. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: COMM 393/393X, ENGL 393/393X, or WRTG 393/393X.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
281
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Index to Course Descriptions
The courses summarized on the following pages are listed 
alphabetically by discipline or subject, as follows. 
Accounting  ................................................................................282
Accounting and Financial Management  ..................................284
Acquisition and Contract Management  ...................................284
Bioinformatics  ...........................................................................284
Biotechnology  ...........................................................................285
Biosecurity and Biodefense  ......................................................286
Biotechnology Management  ....................................................287
Biotechnology Regulatory Affairs  ............................................287
Business Administration—Doctoral Level  ...............................288
Business Administration—Master’s Degree Level  ...................289
Cloud Computing Systems  .......................................................290
Community College Policy and Management ..........................290
Criminal Justice Management  .................................................293
Cyber Communication and Leadership  ....................................294
Cyber Operations  .......................................................................294
Cybersecurity  .............................................................................295
Cybersecurity Management and Policy  ...................................295
Cybersecurity Technology  ........................................................295
Data Analytics  ...........................................................................296
Database Systems Technology  ................................................297
Decisive Communication and Leadership  ...............................298
Digital Forensics and Cyber Investigations  .............................298
Distance Education  ...................................................................299
Distance Education Policy and Management  .........................300
Distance Education Teaching and Training  .............................301
Distance Education Technology  ...............................................301
Education: Teacher Preparation  ...............................................301
Emergency Management  ..........................................................302
Environmental Management  ....................................................303
Financial Management  .............................................................305
Global Health Management  ......................................................306
Healthcare Administration  .......................................................306
Health Informatics Administration  ..........................................308
History ........................................................................................309
Homeland Security Management  ............................................309
Human Resource Management  ...............................................310
Informatics  ................................................................................311
Information Assurance  .............................................................311
Intelligence Management  .........................................................312
Information Systems and Services  ..........................................313
Information Technology  ............................................................314
Instructional Technology  ..........................................................315
Learning Design and Technology  .............................................316
Management  .............................................................................317
Marketing  ...................................................................................318
Nonprofit Management  ............................................................319
Project Management  ................................................................320
Software Engineering  ................................................................321
Special Topics  ...........................................................................322
Strategic Communications  .......................................................322
Systems Engineering  ................................................................322
Transformational Leadership  ...................................................323
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
282
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Accounting 
ACCT 610 Financial Accounting (3)
Prerequisite: 15 credits of undergraduate accounting. A study 
of accounting theory in a strategic framework. An overview of 
relevant theory provides a foundation for further study. Focus 
is on developing skills in critical thinking and applying account-
ing concepts and principles. Topics include the preparation and 
interpretation of corporate financial statements in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting practices (GAAP); account-
ing standards and the standard setting process; the use of 
electronic technology in financial accounting; effective commu-
nication; professional ethics; and current issues, debates, and 
research in accounting.
ACCT 611 Managerial Accounting Data Analytics (3)
Prerequisite: 15 credits of undergraduate accounting. An  
examination of the control and decision-making methodologies 
used by management accountants in solving strategic problems 
for business. Methodologies covered include data analytics, 
break-even analysis, regression analysis, the balanced score-
card, activity-based costing/management, value chain analy- 
sis, total quality management, and performance evaluation/
assessment. Business problems examined range from ethical 
issues to product costing.
ACCT 613 Federal Income Taxation (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 610. A case study-based, problem-oriented 
examination of fundamental federal tax concepts. Tax issues 
and controversies are explored in-depth. Emphasis is on apply-
ing tax laws, as opposed to learning individual tax rules. Meth-
ods of case analysis and research that are typically involved in 
tax planning and litigation are covered. Important definitions, 
judicially created rules, and other tax conventions are explored 
in great detail through the study of each one’s genesis and 
purpose. Topics include tax issues that concern gross income, 
identification of the proper taxpayer, deductions, timing, income 
and deduction characterization, and deferral and capital gains 
and losses.
ACCT 618 Accounting Information Systems (3)
(Formerly ACCT 614.) Prerequisite: ACCT 610. A study of the 
use of information systems in the accounting process, with an 
emphasis on computer systems and internal controls. Focus is 
on the analytical tools necessary to evaluate users’ accounting 
information needs and to design, implement, and maintain an 
accounting information system to support business processes 
and cycles. Topics include the components of contemporary 
accounting information systems; security and internal controls, 
particularly within internet and e-commerce environments; tradi-
tional flow charts and data-flow diagrams; computer networks; 
theory and application of relational databases; and relational 
database management systems. Assignments include design-
ing an accounting information system using a commercial 
database software package.
ACCT 620 CyberAccounting: Management  
and Compliance (3)
Prerequisites: ACCT 610 and ACCT 618. An applied study of 
the principles of information systems management and their 
integration within private-sector organizations served by 
accounting professionals. Emphasis is on developing strategic 
cyberaccounting initiatives to increase cybersecurity awareness 
inside organizations, with organizations in its supply chain, and 
with other stakeholders. topics include cybersecurity compli-
ance requirements issued by federal and state regulatory agen-
cies and voluntary cybersecurity standards, such as the G-7 
Fundamentals of Cybersecurity for the Financial Sector; and the 
AICPAs Cybersecurity’s Risk Management Framework.
ACCT 625 Government and Not-for-Profit Accounting (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 610. A study of the financial accounting 
standards applicable to public-sector and not-for-profit organi-
zations in the United States and their unique reporting require-
ments. Emphasis is on similarities and differences among 
accounting rules for different types of entities and the rationale 
for the accounting standards governing each type. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: ACCT 
625 or ACCT 665.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
283
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ACCT 628 Auditing (3)
(Formerly ACCT 612.) Prerequisite: ACCT 610. An in-depth 
examination of generally accepted auditing standards (GAAS), 
as well as standards for attestation and other services. 
Alternative audit models are evaluated for both their practi-
cal relevance and their theoretical justification as informed by 
current research and emerging information technology. The use 
of computer-assisted auditing techniques (CAAT) and other 
computer-related technology for obtaining evidence is evaluated 
in terms of its effectiveness and suitability in diverse audit envi-
ronments. Methods of evaluating internal control are considered 
in light of the risks encountered in new ways of conducting 
business, such as e-commerce. Professional, ethical, and legal 
responsibilities, as shaped by the contemporary professional, 
legal, and regulatory environments, are examined as they relate 
to audit risk, risk assessment, and audit program planning. The 
use of audit reports and other services as tools to support man-
agement control and decision-making is considered.
ACCT 630 Fraud Examination (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 610. A study of the nature and elements of 
fraud. Topics include fraud prevention, fraud detection, fraud 
investigation, use of controls to prevent fraud, and methods of 
fraud resolution. Emphasis is on the use of forensic accounting 
techniques to analyze what is behind the data generated by the 
accounting system, detect internal control weaknesses, and map 
out a fraud investigation program. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: ACCT 630 or ACCT 608.
ACCT 635 Accounting Ethics (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 610. A study of ethics as a critical founda-
tion for the accounting professional. Topics include the theories 
and bases of ethical reasoning, development of ethical stan-
dards, codes of professional conduct, professional responsi-
bilities and judgment calls in accounting, and the evolution of 
ethics in the accounting profession. Students may receive credit 
for only one of the following courses: ACCT 635 or ACCT 608.
ACCT 640 International Accounting (3)
Prerequisite: ACCT 610. An exploration of international account-
ing and financial reporting. Focus is on evolving reporting 
requirements under International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS). Accounting practices, as influenced by business opera-
tions, culture, and the inherent risk in international accounting 
environments, are compared. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: ACCT 640 or ACCT 665.
ACCT 645 Cyber Forensics in Accounting (3)
Prerequisites: ACCT 618, ACCT 628, and ACCT 630. An applied 
study of the tools, techniques, and technologies used in foren-
sic accounting investigations, data analytics, and litigation. 
Focus is on disentangling obscure evidence discovered during 
fraud investigations using data analytics. Activities include 
conducting a forensic accounting investigation, performing 
analytical tests on financial data, preparing written forensic 
accounting reports for legal proceedings, and serving as an 
expert witness providing testimony supported by evidence and 
analytical tests.
ACCT 660 Information Technology Auditing (3)
(Formerly MSAS 670.) Prerequisites: ACCT 618, ACCT 628, 
ACCT 630, and INFA 610. A study of accounting and information 
systems that integrates subject matter from both disciplines. 
Advanced principles, techniques, and theories are applied 
through the analysis and presentation of case studies by 
student teams. Assignments include a research paper that com-
prehensively assesses an important current issue or emerging 
trend in the fields of accounting and information systems.
ACCT 670 Capstone in CyberAccounting:  
Risk Management (3)
Prerequisites: Completion of all program courses; may be  
taken concurrently with ACCT 635 or INFA 660. A capstone 
exploration of the principles of risk management as practiced  
by federal, state, and local entities. Discussion examines cyber-
accounting risk management as promulgated by professional 
accounting organizations such as the AICPA. Risk management 
techniques are applied to cybersecurity issues confronting pro-
fessional accounting service providers. Focus is on developing 
skills in assessing client risks, designing and developing cyber-
security controls to mitigate cyber attacks on client data, and 
conducting penetration tests to identify potential cyberaccount- 
ing vulnerabilities.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
284
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Accounting and Financial 
Management 
MSAF 670 Accounting and Financial  
Management Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of all program courses except FIN 645. 
A capstone study of accounting and financial management that 
integrates subject matter from both disciplines. Advanced prin-
ciples, techniques, and theories are applied through the analysis 
and presentation of case studies by student teams. Assignments 
include a research paper that comprehensively assesses an 
important current issue or emerging trend in the fields of finan-
cial management and accounting.
Acquisition and Contract 
Management 
ACM 610 Fundamentals of Acquisition Planning  
and Costs Price Analysis (6)
Prerequisite: DCL 600M. Serve as a contract manager and 
explore three major segments of the acquisition process—
acquisition planning, acquisition management, and contract 
pricing—through pre-award, negotiation preparation, and post-
award stages. Complete an acquisition plan using quantitative 
techniques to quantify and facilitate decision. Apply various 
cost analysis techniques and quantitative tools to evaluate  
a contractor’s cost proposal and develop a negotiation range  
and objective.
ACM 620 Sourcing Decisions and Legal Considerations  
in Contracting (6)
Prerequisite: ACM 610. Serve as a contract manager and apply 
legal, administrative, and ethical requirements and principles to 
procurement and contract management. Explore a broad array 
of legal issues applicable to acquisition, as well as the Federal 
Acquisition Regulation and the American Bar Association model 
procurement code for state and local government.
ACM 630 Strategic Supplier Relations in Sustainable 
Supply Environments (6)
Prerequisite: ACM 620. Serve as an acquisitions manager and 
acquire techniques, methodologies, and strategies designed to 
enhance organizational procurement and acquisition efficiency 
and manage supply chain issues. Explore integrated supply 
chains, including the integration of information, supplies, and 
materials flows across multiple supply chain channels; the role 
of information systems and technology in supply chain manage-
ment; e-commerce strategies; and the development and mainte-
nance of supply chain partnerships and other relationships.
ACM 640 Performance Based Logistics  
and Asset Management (6)
Prerequisite: ACM 630. Serve as an acquisitions manager and 
explore logistical issues, techniques, methodologies, and strate-
gies designed to enhance organizational efficiency with the 
acquisition life cycle. Apply specific concepts such as the total 
cost approach to logistics, planning and implementation, sys-
tems relationships and integration, and demand forecasting to 
solve logistical and asset management issues that arise within 
the acquisition life cycle.
ACM 670 Acquisition Continuous Improvement  
and Sustainment Management (6)
Prerequisite: ACM 640. Assume the role of an executive man-
ager and create an acquisitions and contract management busi-
ness continuity and disaster management plan. Make executive-
level decisions to ensure adherence to all rules and regulations 
surrounding these areas. Develop long-term strategic plans 
for maintaining operations, reducing costs, evaluating supplier 
portfolios, and developing sustainable supply chains within 
the acquisition life cycle. Practice ethical decision-making and 
negotiation techniques in analyzing cases containing detailed 
cost and pricing data.
Bioinformatics 
BIFS 613 Statistical Processes for Biotechnology (3)
Prerequisite: STAT 200. A study of statistical tools such as 
Bayesian statistics, Markov processes, and information theo-
retic indices and how they can be used to analyze sequence 
homology, the presence of motifs in sequences, gene expres-
sion, and gene regulation. Topics include information content, 
mutual information, long-range correlation, repeats, Fourier 
analysis, and linguistic methods.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
285
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BIFS 614 Data Structures and Algorithms (3)
An introduction to the definitions, implementations, and applica-
tions of the most basic data structures used in bioinformatics. 
Basic formalism and concepts used in algorithm design and 
the analysis of algorithms are also introduced. The relative 
efficiency of algorithms is estimated by application of these con-
cepts to biological data analysis. Algorithms and data structures 
discussed include those for database searches, motif finding, 
sequence alignment, gene prediction, and microarray analysis.
BIFS 617 Advanced Bioinformatics (3)
An overview of basic programming concepts for performing  
bioinformatics analyses of biological data. Topics include the 
software development life cycle, data types and data representa-
tion, arithmetic and logical operations, conditional execution, iter-
ation, functions, and arrays. An overview of basic data structures 
is also provided. Emphasis is on bioinformatics pipeline develop-
ment, automation of data analysis, and building of bioinformatics 
applications using a high-level programming language.
BIFS 618 Java for Biotechnology Applications (3)
Prerequisite: BIFS 617. A study of basic concepts in Java and 
object-oriented programming in bioinformatics application devel-
opment. Emphasis is on web-based, graphical, and database-
driven application design. Review covers the function and design 
of some Java-based bioinformatics tools. Some commonly used 
libraries in the BioJava project are introduced, and developments 
of reusable modular application objects are examined. Basic 
problem-solving skills in the field of biotechnology using Java 
programming are developed through practical projects.
BIFS 619 Systems Level Approaches in Bioinformatics (3)
Prerequisite: BIFS 617. A study of the bioinformatics techniques 
used in omics (genomics, proteomics, etc.) experiments. Focus 
is on analyzing experiment protocols, comparing the tools used 
for these experiments, and interpreting the data resulting from 
the experiments.
Biotechnology 
BIOT 601 Introduction to Molecular Biology (3)
A thorough grounding in the fundamentals of biology, including 
a broad review of the life sciences with emphasis on molecular 
biology. Topics include the basic concepts and processes of cell 
biology, molecular biology, and immunology. The components of 
a cell, the processes occurring in a single cell, and the function-
ing of a multicellular organism are explained. Discussion also 
covers the use of model organisms to understand basic and 
applied biology.
BIOT 630 Introduction to Bioinformatics (3)
An introduction to bioinformatics. Emphasis is on the interpreta-
tion of data. Topics include new, sophisticated DNA, RNA, and 
protein sequence analyses and pattern recognition and DNA 
computing, as well as more traditional mathematical model-
ing (using Bayesian probability and basic algorithms, machine 
learning and neural networks, and Markov models and dynamic 
programming). Discussion also covers the analysis of tridimen-
sional structures, phylogenic relationships, and genomic and 
proteomic data.
BIOT 640 Societal Issues in Biotechnology (3)
An examination of current societal issues in biotechnology from 
several perspectives. Topics include the commercialization of 
biotechnology; biohazards; managerial views of legal issues 
and bioethics; the need for public scrutiny; environmental and 
cultural issues; and the role of governmental regulatory agen-
cies in researching, developing, and commercializing biotech-
nology. An overview of the early history and modern develop-
ments of biotechnology is provided.
BIOT 643 Techniques of Biotechnology (3)
A comprehensive review of current techniques in biotechnology 
research and applications. The development and use of some 
of the techniques are placed in historical context. Discussion 
covers techniques used in genomics, transcriptomics, and 
proteomics and the applications of these techniques. Current 
plant and animal transformation methods are explained. High 
throughput technologies, including sequencing, real-time RT-PCR, 
SAGE, and microarrays, are also explored. Topics also include 
therapeutic applications of biotechnology, such as gene therapy, 
stem cell technology, and RNA interference. Emerging technolo-
gies in this field are introduced.
BIOT 645 Bioprocessing and the Business  
of Biotechnology (3)
A detailed exploration of the business of biotechnology, its 
structure and operation, and the science on which this relatively 
new global industry sector was founded. Discussion covers a 
wide range of biotechnology applications, from biopharmaceuti-
cals to biofuels, and the technical advances behind them. Focus 
is on methods and economics of bioprocessing and unique 
aspects of the funding, alliances, and global models used in the 
business of biotechnology.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
286
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BIOT 670I Biotechnology Capstone: Bioinformatics (3)
(Open only to students in the bioinformatics specialization.) 
Prerequisite: Completion of 30 credits of program course-
work, including all core courses. An in-depth exploration of the 
bioinformatics field. The objective is to apply knowledge of the 
field while demonstrating research, analytical, oral and writ-
ten communication, teamwork, and leadership skills during a 
semester-long project. Projects are garnered from real world 
problems from industry, academic institutions, and government 
organizations. Students may receive credit for only one of the 
following courses: BIOT 670, BIOT 670I, BIOT 670M, BIOT 670R, 
or BIOT 670S.
BIOT 670M Biotechnology Capstone:  
Biotechnology Management (3)
(Open only to students in the biotechnology management spe-
cialization.) Prerequisite: Completion of 30 credits of program 
coursework, including all core courses. An in-depth exploration 
of the biotechnology management field. The objective is to 
apply knowledge of the field while demonstrating research, ana-
lytical, oral and written communication, teamwork, and leader-
ship skills during a semester-long project. Projects are garnered 
from real world problems from industry, academic institutions, 
and government organizations. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: BIOT 670, BIOT 670I, BIOT 
670M, BIOT 670R, or BIOT 670S.
BIOT 670R Biotechnology Capstone:  
Regulatory Affairs (3)
(Open only to students in the biotechnology regulatory affairs 
specialization.) Prerequisite: Completion of 30 credits of 
program coursework, including all core courses. An in-depth 
exploration of the biotechnology regulatory affairs field. The 
objective is to apply knowledge of the field while demonstrating 
research, analytical, oral and written communication, teamwork, 
and leadership skills during a semester-long project. Projects 
are garnered from real world problems from industry, academic 
institutions, and government organizations. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: BIOT 670, 
BIOT 670I, BIOT 670M, BIOT 670R, or BIOT 670S.
BIOT 670S Biotechnology Capstone: Biosecurity  
and Biodefense (3)
(Open only to students in the biosecurity and biodefense spe-
cialization.) Prerequisite: Completion of 30 credits of program 
coursework, including all core courses. An in-depth exploration 
of the biosecurity and biodefense field. The objective is to apply 
knowledge of the field while demonstrating research, analyti-
cal, oral and written communication, teamwork, and leadership 
skills during a semester-long project. Projects are garnered from 
real world problems from industry, academic institutions, and 
government organizations. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: BIOT 670, BIOT 670I, BIOT 670M, 
BIOT 670R, or BIOT 670S.
Biosecurity  
and Biodefense 
BSBD 640 Agents of Bioterrorism (3)
An examination of the probable weapons of biowarfare, includ-
ing biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons, from several per-
spectives. Topics include their mechanism of action, biological 
impact, detection and recognition, epidemiology, and treatment. 
Their potential dangers and effectiveness are evaluated, and 
strategies for defense against attacks by such weapons are 
investigated. Discussion covers the bioethical challenges of 
anti-bioterror research.
BSBD 641 Biosecurity and Bioterrorism (3)
A review of bioterrorism, biosecurity, and government bio-
defense strategy, including the history and science of biological 
agents in agriculture and society. Discussion covers surveil-
lance; public health preparedness; response; and recovery 
at community, state, and federal government levels. Various 
aspects of the law, including the Posse Comitatus Act and 
federal and state quarantine powers, are introduced. The mental 
health consequences of bioterrorism are also discussed. A case 
study of a hypothetical biological attack is analyzed in detail.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
287
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BSBD 642 Advanced Biosecurity and Bioterrorism (3)
Prerequisite: BSBD 641. A thorough examination of special  
and advanced topics in bioterrorism and biosecurity issues.  
Topics include the hidden biological warfare programs of the 
20th century; advances in biotechnology and molecular micro-
biology and the dilemma of dual use research; domestic and 
foreign terrorist groups, including rogue states; state-of-the-art 
microbial forensics; ethics and civil rights; and current trends 
in policy development, consequence management, and public 
health responses to new threats to homeland security. Discus-
sion also addresses special topics of the students’ choice. 
Future challenges in biosecurity are discussed as part of a 
comprehensive bioterrorism exercise and the analysis of case 
studies of hypothetical threats.
BSBD 643 Strategies for Interagency Cooperation, 
Verification, and Global Countermeasures  
in Biodefense (6)
An in-depth study of the verification procedures used in global 
countermeasures and strategies. Global biosecurity and over-
sight are examined using real-world examples. Discussion cov-
ers the epidemiology of emerging infectious diseases as they 
relate to defense against threats from nonconventional sources. 
Topics also include the evolution and current status of the 
Biological Weapons Convention; the integration of responses 
from local, state, and multiple federal agencies; and other chal-
lenges facing public health departments, including the potential 
economic, political, and social impacts of bioterrorism.
Biotechnology 
Management 
BTMN 632 Commercializing Biotechnology  
in Early-Stage Ventures (3)
(Formerly BIOT 641.) An overview of the methods for planning 
and organizing biotechnology ventures. The elements of a busi-
ness plan are considered, as are methods for assessing various 
needs, such as capital, personnel, technology, and market-
ing. Emphasis is on approaches to marketing technology and 
developing joint ventures. The advantages and disadvantages 
of forming international ventures are weighed. Discussion also 
covers the importance of maintaining relations with external 
constituents and the need for managing public awareness.
BTMN 634 Selection and Evaluation  
of Biotechnology Projects (3)
A study of the applications of methodologies for technology 
forecasting, technology assessment, project management, and 
data auditing to the selection and evaluation of biotechnology 
projects. The underlying rationale, principles, procedures, and 
cost effectiveness of data auditing are examined. A systems 
approach to performance evaluation is presented.
BTMN 636 Biotechnology and the  
Regulatory Environment (3)
A comprehensive review of the role of regulation in biotechnol-
ogy products and services development and commercialization. 
Emphasis is on the roles of the federal government, state gov-
ernment agencies, international bodies, and professional groups, 
especially the regulatory roles of the U.S. Environmental Protec-
tion Agency, Department of Agriculture, and Food and Drug 
Administration. Discussion covers human subject protection, 
good laboratory practices, and good manufacturing practices.
Biotechnology  
Regulatory Affairs 
BTRA 640 Preclinical and Clinical Research Design (3)
An examination of preclinical and clinical research designs. 
Emphasis is on identifying and addressing challenges associ-
ated with elements of good laboratory and clinical practice  
and qualifying and managing a laboratory for a clinical trial. 
Discussion covers best practices for planning research and  
collecting, analyzing, and reporting data from drug/device  
development studies.
BTRA 641 Product Life Cycle Approval, Production,  
and Marketing for Devices and Drugs (3)
An in-depth study of the product life cycle for medical devices 
and implants and pharmaceuticals. Focus is on the various 
stages within the life cycle from conceptualization of a prod-
uct pipeline in research and development through postmarket 
surveillance and production. Topics include regulatory submis-
sion, approval, production, and the postmarket environment for 
both drugs and devices. Challenges surrounding the approval 
and naming of follow-on biologics are addressed. Discus-
sion also covers combination medicines, the stages of a drug 
pipeline and risk assessment at each stage, and the decreasing 
productivity of the drug pipeline. The role of a contract research 
organization in testing and approval is explained, and the nature 
of the support services they provide to the biotechnology and 
devices industry is explored.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
288
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
BTRA 642 Global Biotechnology Business Issues (3)
An examination of preclinical and clinical research designs. 
Emphasis is on identifying and addressing challenges associ-
ated with elements of good laboratory and clinical practice  
and qualifying and managing a laboratory for a clinical trial. 
Discussion covers best practices for planning research and  
collecting, analyzing, and reporting data from drug/device  
development studies.
BTRA 643 Practical Applications of Biotech  
Regulatory Affairs (6)
A capstone study of regulatory affairs related to the biotechnol-
ogy industry that integrates knowledge and skills gained from 
previous study. Emphasis is on completion of a group project 
simulating the development of a drug or device through the prod-
uct life cycle. The project is designed to demonstrate knowledge 
of international biotech business, ethics, and production issues 
and skills in making decisions regarding a wide range of regula-
tory issues and to provide a transition for applying these skills to 
applications in the biotechnology environment.
Business Administration 
—Doctoral Level 
DBA 600 Foundations of Doctoral Studies (3) 
(Required for full admission to the Doctor of Business Adminis-
tration program.) Prerequisite: Department approval. Prepare for 
doctoral studies by developing foundational skills in evidence-
based research and analytical writing. Engage in critical thinking, 
in-depth analysis, and research synthesis. Evaluate published 
scholarship. Assess personal readiness for doctoral study. 
DBA 800 Interpreting and Translating Management 
Theory in Practice (6)
Prerequisite: DBA 600 and full admission to the DBA program. 
Evaluate management theories to explain organizational opera-
tions in relation to forces that act at the level of the individual, 
group, and society. Connect these explanations within practitio-
ner systems and analyze and associate management theories 
with practical management strategies.
DBA 810 Research as a Tool for Management  
Decision-Making (6)
Develop the ability to review, evaluate, and perform manage-
ment research for decision-making and critically interpret both 
qualitative and quantitative research methodologies. Apply 
tools of business research to advise an organization in decision-
making. Refine skills to effectively communicate management 
research findings to practitioners.
DBA 820 Evidence-Based Research Methods (6)
Acquire and appraise evidence using sophisticated biblio- 
graphic search strategies to inform management decision- 
making. Defend qualitative data analysis research choices.  
Apply evidence-based solutions to an organization and assess 
their effectiveness. Develop a plan to use assessments to itera-
tively improve solutions.
DBA 830 Data Analytics in Practice (6)
Review and refine quantitative skills essential for analytical 
leadership. Explore methods of data mining, forecasting, and 
predictive models to inform and enable evidence-based decision-
making and investigate the data environment in an organization. 
Assess an enterprise’s current capabilities to develop recom-
mendations for a stronger business intelligence climate.
DBA 840 Designing Evidence-Based  
Management Solutions (6)
Prepare advice for an organization seeking management solu-
tions to a specific problem. Analyze and evaluate organizational 
context, select appropriate management tools, and develop 
solutions. Employ project management methods and collabo-
rate effectively with the team face-to-face and online. Produce 
written and oral presentations of results and recommendations 
to organizational stakeholders.
DBA 850 Producing Original Management Ideas  
That Influence: Publishing and Conferencing (6)
Identify a management problem, create an evidence-based 
research approach to solve the problem, and execute it. Present 
results at a scholarly or practice conference and submit written 
results in the form of a professional-quality article to a scholarly 
or practice journal.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
289
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
DBA 860 Producing Actionable Knowledge: Dissertation 
Problem Statement and Literature Review (4) 
Construct a framework for investigating a relevant management 
problem. Identify the scope of the problem, construct a suitable 
research question, and examine the scholarly literature that pro-
vides a credible and insightful explanation of the primary con-
cepts and relationships surrounding the problem. Produce the 
dissertation problem statement and literature review chapter.
DBA 870 Producing Actionable Knowledge: Dissertation 
Methodology and Analysis (4) 
Design an evidence-based research approach to investigate 
the dissertation management problem. Collect relevant data 
to answer the research question and analyze and interpret the 
data to consider how they inform the research question. Pro-
duce the dissertation methods and results chapters.
DBA 880 Producing Actionable Knowledge: Management 
Implications from Dissertation Research (4)
Complete the dissertation process. Formulate and explain the 
implications and value of the research findings for management 
practice and make specific recommendations to improve man-
agement practice. Present and defend the dissertation research 
successfully and publish it.
DBA 899 Continuing Doctoral Matriculation (1) 
Continue dissertation work.
Business Administration 
—Master’s Degree Level 
MBA 610 Leading Organizations and People (6)
Assess and develop your leadership skills by creating a personal 
leadership and professional development plan that you will 
refine during the program. Develop a strategic understanding of 
your organization by analyzing its mission, vision, goals, and val-
ues. Evaluate your organization’s culture, climate, and approach 
to decision-making and assess leadership effectiveness, gover-
nance structure, and processes. Explore how high-performing 
work teams can be a source of competitive advantage.
MBA 620 Financial Decision-Making (6)
Prerequisite: MBA 610. Apply concepts behind financial 
statements, pricing, cost analysis, and capital budgeting in 
decisions. Propose solutions in real-world scenarios by using 
published financial reports and data from well-known national 
and international brands. Apply concepts from managerial 
economics to make pricing decisions for a business. Review 
business performance by analyzing the cash flow statement, 
income statement, and balance sheet. Make cost allocation, 
financing, and investment decisions by applying knowledge of 
corporate valuation. Determine the cost of capital and make 
capital budgeting decisions.
MBA 630 Leading in the Multicultural  
Global Environment (6)
Prerequisite: MBA 620. Enhance cultural competence and  
evaluate opportunities and risks for operations in a global 
market. Expand the ability to apply ethical decision-making 
models. Assess issues of culture, business ethics, employment 
law, contracts, and criminal law in the context of a global busi-
ness. Analyze political, legal, economic, and cultural forces that 
impact multinational businesses. Recommend the legal form 
and organizational structure of a business.
MBA 640 Innovation Through Marketing  
and Technology (6)
Prerequisite: MBA 630. Apply principles of market research and 
branding to innovative offering. Use web analytics to make deci-
sions in digital marketing. Organize tasks in a marketing plan, 
assess market risk and opportunity, and collect data required 
to implement the marketing plan. Develop financial projections 
and suitable metrics for tracking the marketing plan.
MBA 670 Strategic Decision-Making (6)
Prerequisite: MBA 640. Assume the role of a strategy officer 
who reports to the CEO. Develop an understanding of strategic 
leadership. Identify activities in the value chain of an organiza-
tion and propose a plan to relocate one or more activities to 
another geographical region. Prepare a project management 
plan for the opening of a facility in a new country. Develop a 
business plan that includes an entry strategy, marketing plan, 
competitive strategy, and financial statements.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
290
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Cloud Computing 
Systems 
Courses in cloud computing systems (designated CCS) have 
higher computing requirements than the minimum technical 
requirements stated on p. 26. They require an Intel Core i7 
processor or higher, with speeds of 2GHz or faster, at least 6GB 
of available disk space, and at least 16GB RAM (32GB recom-
mended). Display devices should have a resolution of 1920 X 
1080 or better (PCs) or 1440 X 900 retina display (Mac).
CCS 610 Cloud Services and Technologies (6)
(Formerly CCA 610.) Prerequisite: DCL 600T. Master the con-
cepts underlying cloud computing, cloud services, and cloud 
applications. Investigate and analyze the technologies and 
services of the cloud services industry and distinguish between 
different cloud development environments. Evaluate the risk 
and the legal and regulatory compliance issues associated with 
cloud adoption while identifying the benefits of cloud infrastruc-
ture for the organization. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: CCA 610 or CCS 610.
CCS 625 Network Engineering (6)
(Formerly CCA 625.) Prerequisite: CCS 610. Explore network 
engineering concepts, functions, applications, configurations, 
and hardware. Review network protocols and services that 
serve as the foundation to enable IT infrastructure and serv- 
ices. Evaluate network specifications and requirements using 
industry best practices and standards in designing network 
infrastructures to meet business needs. Students may receive 
credit for only one of the following courses: CCA 620, CCA 625, 
or CCS 625.
CCS 630 Cloud Infrastructure Planning, Design,  
and Configurations (6)
(Formerly CCA 630.) Prerequisite: CCS 625. Apply the underly-
ing concepts, standards, and technologies of cloud computing 
(including virtualization, cloud data management, cloud pro-
gramming models, cloud analytics applications, interoperability, 
and portability) to the planning, design, and configuration of a 
cloud infrastructure. Prepare policies and documents to plan 
and design a cloud infrastructure successfully, including  
a policy document, architecture plan, cloud deployment run 
book, and user training plan. Perform baseline configurations  
on the cloud environment to satisfy business requirements.  
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: CCA 630 or CCS 630.
CCS 640 Cloud Computing Implementations  
and Migrations (6)
(Formerly CCA 640.) Implement and configure a cloud envi-
ronment based on specifications. Analyze current workloads, 
migrate existing IT systems to the cloud, and configure new 
systems or services to enhance business operations. Manage 
the implementation of the cloud to ensure successful deploy-
ment. Configure features for elasticity, availability, and scal-
ability using industry-standard techniques, best practices, and 
tools. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: CCA 640 or CCS 640.
CCS 670 Cloud Computing Capstone (6)
(Formerly CCA 670.) Prerequisite: CCS 640. Assume the role of  
a cloud computing architect. Implement advanced features 
of the cloud platform, including auditing and logging, cloud 
orchestration, service catalog, and cloud metering and billing. 
Investigate, plan, and implement these features on a specific 
cloud platform. Prepare a cloud portfolio report based on cloud 
migrations and implementations completed in the program. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CCA 670 or CCS 670.
Community College 
Policy and Management
CCPA 800A Foundations of Management (3)
A comprehensive foundation in the history of management and 
the structure and function of organizations. The objective is 
to develop a new way of understanding and managing opera-
tional and strategic issues in public and private organizations 
in the face of accelerating social, economic, and technological 
changes. Topics include organizational theory, strategic think- 
ing and strategic management, theories of decision-making, 
leadership, organizational culture, and management in a post- 
industrial society. Emphasis is on using problem-solving, applica-
tion, and evaluation skills to analyze the theories and practices 
of current and emerging organizational challenges and oppor-
tunities, critically assess the ideas of others, and defend one’s 
own ideas through the application of scholarship. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CCPA 800A 
or DMCC 800.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
291
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CCPA 800B Foundations of Management (3)
A comprehensive foundation in the history of management and 
the structure and function of organizations. The objective is 
to develop a new way of understanding and managing opera-
tional and strategic issues in public and private organizations 
in the face of accelerating social, economic, and technological 
changes. Topics include organizational theory, strategic think- 
ing and strategic management, theories of decision-making, 
leadership, organizational culture, and management in a post- 
industrial society. Emphasis is on using problem-solving, applica-
tion, and evaluation skills to analyze the theories and practices 
of current and emerging organizational challenges and oppor-
tunities, critically assess the ideas of others, and defend one’s 
own ideas through the application of scholarship. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CCPA 800B 
or DMCC 800.
CCPA 810A Leadership and Change (3)
A study of leadership not just for survival but for sustainability 
in environments where external pressure for change is the domi-
nant feature. The objective is to examine change and leader-
ship issues in varied industries and one’s own organization by 
identifying and analyzing theories and concepts, assessing the 
applicability of classic works and current perspectives, testing 
ideas using case studies, and developing various scenarios 
and strategies. Topics include the knowledge and abilities, 
such as improvisation and reinvention, needed for managing 
change; the roles and skills needed at all levels for leading in 
new organizational models involving virtual teams; and the 
impact of change (particularly frequent change) on individuals 
and organizations. Emphasis is on recognizing the link between 
leadership, change, and organizational resilience and applying 
the lessons. Students may receive credit for only one of the fol-
lowing courses: CCPA 810A and DMCC 810.
CCPA 810B Leadership and Change (3)
A study of leadership not just for survival but for sustainability 
in environments where external pressure for change is the domi-
nant feature. The objective is to examine change and leader-
ship issues in varied industries and one’s own organization by 
identifying and analyzing theories and concepts, assessing the 
applicability of classic works and current perspectives, testing 
ideas using case studies, and developing various scenarios 
and strategies. Topics include the knowledge and abilities, 
such as improvisation and reinvention, needed for managing 
change; the roles and skills needed at all levels for leading in 
new organizational models involving virtual teams; and the 
impact of change (particularly frequent change) on individuals 
and organizations. Emphasis is on recognizing the link between 
leadership, change, and organizational resilience and applying 
the lessons. Students may receive credit for only one of the fol-
lowing courses: CCPA 810B and DMCC 810.
CCPA 821A Higher Education Policy (3)
An examination of national, state, and local education policy 
formation and an analysis of the educational policy process, 
including antecedents, the framing of problems and solutions 
within policies, policy implementation, and policy consequences 
in the context of the community college environment. Topics 
may include the education ecosystem, external stakeholder rela-
tionships, educational outcomes, labor market-driven innovation 
and change, workforce education, organizational development, 
student-centric culture, and technology leadership. The goal 
is to develop key leadership competencies, including strategic 
planning, decision-making, resource management, communi-
cation, collaboration, and advocacy as they support effective 
policy development. Students may receive credit for only one  
of the following courses: CCPA 821A and DMCC 821.
CCPA 821B Higher Education Policy (3)
An examination of national, state, and local education policy 
formation and an analysis of the educational policy process, 
including antecedents, the framing of problems and solutions 
within policies, policy implementation, and policy consequences 
in the context of the community college environment. Topics 
may include the education ecosystem, external stakeholder rela-
tionships, educational outcomes, labor market-driven innovation 
and change, workforce education, organizational development, 
student-centric culture, and technology leadership. The goal 
is to develop key leadership competencies, including strategic 
planning, decision-making, resource management, communi-
cation, collaboration, and advocacy as they support effective 
policy development. Students may receive credit for only one  
of the following courses: CCPA 821B and DMCC 821.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
292
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CCPA 830A Research Methods (3)
An applied study of how to design, interpret, and critique  
both quantitative and qualitative research. The application  
of methods grounded in the philosophy of science provides a 
solid foundation that supports the identification and analysis 
of researchable questions and includes one qualitative and one 
quantitative methodology. Assignments include short analyses 
representative of the different methodological traditions. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CCPA 830A and DMCC 830.
CCPA 830B Research Methods (3)
Prerequisite: CCPA 830A. An applied study of how to design, 
interpret, and critique both quantitative and qualitative research. 
The application of methods grounded in the philosophy of sci-
ence provides a solid foundation that supports the identification 
and analysis of researchable questions and includes one quali-
tative and one quantitative methodology. Assignments include 
short analyses representative of the different methodological 
traditions. Students may receive credit for only one of the fol-
lowing courses: CCPA 830B and DMCC 830.
CCPA 841A Institutional Assessment in the Community 
College Environment (3)
An exploration of the criteria, indicators, and processes by 
which institutions define and evaluate their effectiveness and 
use data to improve the quality of programs and services. 
Emphasis is on the assessment of student learning outcomes, 
measurement of student success (e.g., progress through devel-
opmental courses, persistence, transfer, and graduation), pro-
gram evaluations, and the role of regional accreditation. Topics 
include ways in which community college leaders can engage in 
a broad array of organizational and administrative activities to 
build cultures of evidence. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: CCPA 841A and DMCC 841.
CCPA 841B Institutional Assessment in the Community 
College Environment (3)
An exploration of the criteria, indicators, and processes by 
which institutions define and evaluate their effectiveness and 
use data to improve the quality of programs and services. 
Emphasis is on the assessment of student learning outcomes, 
measurement of student success (e.g., progress through devel-
opmental courses, persistence, transfer, and graduation), pro-
gram evaluations, and the role of regional accreditation. Topics 
include ways in which community college leaders can engage in 
a broad array of organizational and administrative activities to 
build cultures of evidence. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: CCPA 841B and DMCC 841.
CCPA 851A Community College Advocacy, Resource 
Development, and Strategic Allocation (3)
An exploration of the process by which community college lead-
ers advocate for their students and organization in the face of 
the challenges and opportunities in higher education today and 
the skills needed for successful advocacy. Topics include the 
use of argumentation, data, and presentation skills to develop 
and effectively present cases for support at local, state, and 
federal levels. Discussion covers the world of community col-
lege fundraising and the potential of entrepreneurial ventures to 
help close the funding gap. Both sides of the finance equation, 
including resource development and strategic allocation, are 
explored in depth. The goal is to develop an understanding of 
community college revenue sources (state funds, local funds, 
tuition, and other), define the role of entrepreneurship, philan-
thropy, and bonds in expanding college revenue, and apply 
financial analytics to define a healthy institution. Focus is on 
developing the skills to advocate and find support for equity 
and student success, building a capacity to allocate college 
resources to improve equitable student outcomes, and under-
standing the budget as a moral document for the college. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CCPA 851A and DMCC 851.
CCPA 851B Community College Advocacy, Resource 
Development, and Strategic Allocation (3)
An exploration of the process by which community college lead-
ers advocate for their students and organization in the face of 
the challenges and opportunities in higher education today and 
the skills needed for successful advocacy. Topics include the 
use of argumentation, data, and presentation skills to develop 
and effectively present cases for support at local, state, and 
federal levels. Discussion covers the world of community col-
lege fundraising and the potential of entrepreneurial ventures to 
help close the funding gap. Both sides of the finance equation, 
including resource development and strategic allocation, are 
explored in depth. The goal is to develop an understanding of 
community college revenue sources (state funds, local funds, 
tuition, and other), define the role of entrepreneurship, philan-
thropy, and bonds in expanding college revenue, and apply 
financial analytics to define a healthy institution. Focus is on 
developing the skills to advocate and find support for equity 
and student success, building a capacity to allocate college 
resources to improve equitable student outcomes, and under-
standing the budget as a moral document for the college. Stu-
dents may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
CCPA 851B and DMCC 851.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
293
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CCPA 861A Special Topics in Policy  
and Administration (3)
A survey of significant topics in community college policy and 
administration. The aim is to explore the history and mod-
ern mission of community colleges as engines of equity and 
economic mobility, the structure of community college systems 
across the United States, and key differences in governance, 
funding, and centralization of authority. Topics include the 
development of the student success movement, state and 
national issues, and the critical role of governance and gov-
erning boards in the effective management. Emphasis is on 
developing an understanding of principles of good governance 
(e.g., policy governance, the board/CEO relationship, board 
stewardship and education, rogue board members, and other 
governance issues) and the ability to lead with board support.
CCPA 861B Special Topics in Policy  
and Administration (3)
A survey of significant topics in community college policy and 
administration. The aim is to explore the history and mod-
ern mission of community colleges as engines of equity and 
economic mobility, the structure of community college systems 
across the United States, and key differences in governance, 
funding, and centralization of authority. Topics include the 
development of the student success movement, state and 
national issues, and the critical role of governance and gov-
erning boards in the effective management. Emphasis is on 
developing an understanding of principles of good governance 
(e.g., policy governance, the board/CEO relationship, board 
stewardship and education, rogue board members, and other 
governance issues) and the ability to lead with board support.
CCPA 880 Independent Doctoral Study (3)
Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Supervised study 
of policy and administration topics in doctoral studies. May be 
repeated to a maximum of 12 credits.
CCPA 890 Dissertation Part I (3)
The identification and refinement of the dissertation topic. The 
objective is to research questions relevant to the chosen topic, 
conduct a review of the literature on that topic, and develop a 
conceptual model and associated hypotheses. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CCPA 890 
and DMCC 890
CCPA 891 Dissertation Part II (3)
The identification of an appropriate dissertation methodology. 
The goal is to select the dissertation research methodology that 
will be utilized to evaluate the conceptual model and hypoth-
eses. The dissertation proposal is defended. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CCPA 891 
and DMCC 891
CCPA 892 Dissertation Part III (3)
Development of dissertation content. The aim is to identify 
appropriate sources of data, collect and analyze the data in 
the context of the chosen methodology, and draw conclusions 
regarding the conceptual model and associated hypotheses. 
Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: CCPA 892 and DMCC 892
CCPA 893 Dissertation Part IV (3)
Finalization of dissertation content. The objective is to revise 
and complete the dissertation. Steps covered include develop-
ing all necessary supplemental materials, proofing and format-
ting the dissertation, and gaining faculty approval for final 
submission and final defense.
CCPA 899 Continuing Doctoral Matriculation (1) 
Continued dissertation work.
Criminal Justice 
Management 
CJMS 600 Critical Analysis of the Criminal  
Justice System (3)
An analysis of the U.S. criminal justice system. Topics include 
the role of criminal justice agencies and personnel in the pre-
vention and response to crime and interagency cooperation and 
coalition building from a manager’s perspective.
CJMS 610 Perspectives in Law Enforcement 
Management (3)
A study of law-enforcement philosophies and techniques to 
reduce crime commonly applied at the organizational level.  
Topics include the politics of policing, police/community rela-
tions, police research, professionalization of personnel, and 
emerging problems in policing from a domestic and interna-
tional perspective.
CJMS 620 Issues in Correctional Administration (3)
Prerequisites: CJMS 600 and CJMS 610. An in-depth study of 
current challenges for managers in correctional environments. 
Topics include the privatization of corrections, intelligence shar-
ing, re-entry and community corrections, security threat groups, 
assessment techniques and empirical evaluations of treatment 
methods, special populations, growth rates, the political envi-
ronment, and interagency and community cooperation.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
294
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CJMS 630 Seminar in Security Management (3)
Prerequisites: CJMS 600 and CJMS 610. A study of the manage-
ment of security operations within a private setting. Discussion 
covers vulnerability assessment; emergency planning; inter-
agency cooperation; threat assessment; use of technology; and 
information gathering, sharing, and storing. Topics also include 
personnel management, budgeting, reporting requirements, and 
current trends.
CJMS 640 Criminal Justice Intelligence Systems  
and Approaches (3)
Prerequisites: CJMS 600 and CJMS 610. An in-depth examina-
tion of the principles that guide the gathering and sharing of 
intelligence in the United States. Emphasis is on the interoper-
ability between crime-fighting agencies within the criminal jus-
tice system. Topics include analytic methodologies, interview 
and interrogation techniques, open-source and proprietary data 
sources, criminal organization analysis, criminal conspiracy, 
enterprise theory, trial testimony, and witness protection.
CJMS 650 Legal Aspects within the Criminal  
Justice System (3)
Prerequisites: CJMS 600 and CJMS 610. An introduction to the 
impact of constitutional and criminal law on managerial respon-
sibilities within the criminal justice system. Topics include 
pivotal historic and current legal cases and their application 
to methods of prevention, as well as reaction to crime in the 
United States.
CJMS 660 Issues in Criminal Justice Leadership (3)
Prerequisite: 30 credits of program coursework, including all 
core and specialization courses except MGMT 670. A discus-
sion of case studies involving successful leaders in the criminal 
justice system. Analysis covers the various characteristics 
and leadership styles that have proven most effective in the 
profession. Various theories, models, historical examples, and 
practical applications are reviewed. Senior criminal justice lead-
ers discuss issues via videoconferencing. Topics include ethics 
and virtue in criminal justice; navigating the political environ-
ment (e.g., being politically savvy without being political); staff 
development; and labor relations, media relations, and working 
effectively with various advocacy groups.
Cyber Communication 
and Leadership 
CBR 600 Communicating, Problem-Solving,  
and Leading in Cybersecurity (6)
Make yourself more valuable to an employer by gaining and 
improving skills in communication and problem-solving. Explore 
the field of cybersecurity by developing connections to your 
career aspirations, creating a professional social network pres-
ence, and using critical thinking to inform decisions. Improve 
and refine your skills in communication, critical thinking, quan-
titative reasoning, and team leadership. Hone your professional 
writing and oral communication skills to produce effective 
presentations and become proficient with current technol-
ogy. Students may receive credit for only one of the following 
courses: CBR 600, DCL 600M, DCL 600T, or PRO 600.
Cyber Operations 
Courses in cyber operations (designated COP) have higher com-
puting requirements than the minimum technical requirements 
stated on p. 26. They require an Intel Core i7 processor or 
higher, with speeds of 2GHz or faster, at least 6GB of available 
disk space, and at least 16GB RAM (32GB recommended). Dis-
play devices should have a resolution of 1920 X 1080 or better 
(PCs) or 1440 X 900 retina display (Mac).
COP 610 Foundations of Cyber Operations (6)
Prerequisite: DCL 600T. Gain the foundational information 
security knowledge and skills needed to work in cyber opera-
tions, including security first principles, access control, and 
layered defense. Apply risk analysis of information and informa-
tion systems, integrate cryptographic techniques for protecting 
information, and crack codes through the use of cryptanalysis.
COP 620 Cybersecurity Defense (6)
Prerequisite: COP 610. Master the application of defense-in-
depth architecture in system design and counteract threats and 
vulnerabilities in networks, devices, operating systems, data 
management systems, and applications. Identify cloud and 
virtualization security issues and respond to them using their 
countermeasures. Apply intrusion, cyber defense, and attack 
detection techniques in a laboratory.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
295
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
COP 630 Cyber Law and Digital Forensics (6)
Prerequisite: COP 620. Explore U.S. and international laws  
governing cyber operations and digital evidence. Design a  
cyber offense campaign that complies with U.S laws and  
apply digital forensics tools and techniques for network,  
media, and RAM of common operating systems and devices  
in a virtual environment.
COP 640 Secure Software (6)
Prerequisite: COP 630. Master secure design and operation 
principles by examining classes of well-known defects that lead 
to security vulnerabilities and utilize both static and dynamic 
analysis tools to find those vulnerabilities. Apply secure design 
principles in a virtual environment.
COP 670 Cyber Operations Capstone (6)
Prerequisite: COP 640. Assume the role of a cyber warrior. Apply 
reverse engineering techniques to analyze malware and system 
software and implement cyber offense techniques in a labora-
tory to penetrate and infect a system that lacks cyber defenses.
Cybersecurity 
CYB 670 Cybersecurity Capstone (6)
Prerequisite: CST 640, DFC 640, or CMP 640. Assume the role 
of a cybersecurity professional by examining current issues in 
cybersecurity management, including enterprise risk manage-
ment, vulnerability assessment, threat analysis, crisis manage-
ment, security architecture, security models, security policy 
development and implementation, security compliance, informa-
tion privacy, identity management, incident response, disaster 
recovery, and business continuity planning, particularly in the 
health, banking, and finance sectors.
Cybersecurity 
Management and Policy 
CMP 610 Foundations in Cybersecurity Management (6)
Prerequisite: CBR 600. Apply the principles of cybersecurity 
management. Analyze and draft cybersecurity policies; create 
practical approaches to risk analysis; practice techniques to 
prevent intrusions and attacks that threaten organizational 
data; and participate in exercises in cryptography, ethical hack-
ing, and crisis management.
CMP 620 Cybersecurity Governance (6)
Prerequisite: CMP 610. Examine important human aspects of 
cybersecurity, such as the motivations for cybercrimes, includ-
ing hacker psychology and hacker culture. Explore the legal 
and regulatory environments related to local, state, national, 
and international cybersecurity concerns. Formulate policy and 
conduct analysis for the prevention of intrusions, attacks, and 
threats to organizational data.
CMP 630 Risk Management and  
Organizational Resilience (6)
Prerequisite: CMP 620. Apply critical thinking and analysis 
to determine potential risks to the enterprise. Investigate the 
application of systems, tools, and concepts to minimize risk in 
an organization’s cyberspace initiatives. Explore how to identify 
threats, conduct vulnerability assessments, and perform risk 
assessment and management. Examine system development 
and application assurance from a holistic viewpoint that spans 
the cyberspace landscapes. Gain an understanding of the value 
provided by regulatory, policy, and compliance guidelines in 
addition to pure technology options.
CMP 640 Cybersecurity Program Development (6)
Prerequisite: CMP 630. Create a cybersecurity program using 
the enterprise as a framework. Examine the role of architectural 
methodology as part of the complete cybersecurity program. 
Consider the cyber threat landscape and the strategies related 
to incident response, awareness, and the mobile environment 
and its impact on government and industry. Explore identity 
theft, network security, cyber strategy development, and mobile 
device management.
Cybersecurity Technology 
CST 610 Cyberspace and Cybersecurity Foundations (6)
Gain knowledge of the foundations of cybersecurity and apply 
cyber methodologies to cyber architectures, services, protocols, 
algorithms, hardware and software components, and program-
ming languages. Become familiar with the important role that 
business continuity planning, security management practices, 
security architecture, operations security, and physical security 
play in cybersecurity. Explore the impact of cyber terrorism and 
national security on cybersecurity. Gain hands-on, real-world 
experience with state-of-the-art tools and technologies in a lab-
intensive environment. Students may receive credit for only one 
of the following courses: CST 610 or DFC 610.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
296
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
CST 620 Prevention of Cyber Attack Methodologies (6)
Prerequisite: CST 610. Explore the theories and practices 
related to the prevention of cyber attacks. Design, apply, and 
analyze technological solutions that address countermeasures, 
encryption, network access control methods, firewalls, intrusion 
detection/prevention, and secure systems development. Practice 
techniques such as software assurance, verification, and valida-
tion; virtual network and cloud computing security techniques; 
and physical security techniques. Examine the nation’s complex 
critical infrastructure industries. Use state-of-the-art tools and 
technologies in a lab-intensive environment that provides hands-
on, real-world experience.
CST 630 Advanced Cyber Exploitation  
and Mitigation Methodologies (6)
Prerequisite: CST 620. Practice intrusion detection and preven-
tion, exploitation, and mitigation in cyberspace. Employ techno-
logical solutions that identify, resolve, prevent, and mitigate cyber 
attacks. Utilize network security techniques, monitoring, auditing, 
intrusion detection and prevention, and ethical penetration test-
ing. Use state-of-the-art tools and technologies in a lab-intensive 
environment that provides hands-on, real-world experience.
CST 640 Digital Forensics Technology and Practices (6)
Prerequisite: CST 630. Gain proficiency with the tools and tech-
nologies commonly used in forensic examinations and utilize 
best practices. Explore procedures for securing and validating 
evidence, including digital media and physical memory, as well 
as for recovering artifacts and analyzing, reporting, and present-
ing results in both criminal and civil situations. Gain experience 
with mobile forensic analysis. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: CST 640 or DFC 620.
Data Analytics 
DATA 610 Decision Management Systems (6)
An examination of the process of decision-making in large orga-
nizations and the technologies that can be used to enhance 
data-driven decision-making. Focus is on the underlying frame-
work of good decision-making, featuring operational decisions 
as reusable assets that can be automated through the creation 
of business rules. How data can add analytic insight to improve 
decisions is explored. Discussion covers best practices for 
long-term success of an analytics project in terms of project 
management and communications with an emphasis on  
the Cross-Industry Standard Process for Data Mining  
(CRISP-DM) methodology.
DATA 620 Data Management and Visualization (6)
Prerequisite: DATA 610. A presentation of the fundamental 
concepts and techniques in managing and presenting data 
for effective data-driven decision-making. Topics in data 
management and design include data design approaches 
for performance and availability, such as data storage and 
indexing strategies; data warehousing, such as requirement 
analysis, dimensional modeling, and ETL (extract, transform, 
load) processing; and metadata management. Topics in data 
visualization include data types; data dimensionalities, such 
as time-series and geospatial data; forms of data visualization, 
including heat maps and infographs; and best practices for 
usable, consumable, and actionable data/results presentation.
DATA 630 Machine Learning (6)
Prerequisite: DATA 620. A practical survey of several modern 
machine learning techniques that can be applied to make 
informed business decisions. Discussion covers supervised 
and unsupervised learning techniques, including naïve Bayes, 
regression, decision trees, neural networks, nearest neighbor, 
and cluster analysis. How each of these methods learns from 
past data to find underlying patterns useful for prediction, 
classification, and exploratory data analysis is examined. 
Discussion covers significant tasks in real-world applications, 
including handling of missing data, evaluating classifiers, and 
measuring precision. Major software tools are used to apply 
machine learning methods in a wide range of domains such  
as healthcare, finance, marketing, and government.
DATA 640 Predictive Modeling (6)
Prerequisite: DATA 630. An introduction to advanced concepts 
in predictive modeling and techniques to discover patterns 
in data, identify variables with the most predictive power, and 
develop predictive models. Advanced statistical and machine 
learning algorithms such as support vector machines (SVM), 
regression, deep learning, and ensemble models are used to 
develop, assess, compare, and explain complex predictive mod-
els. Topics include high-performance modeling, genetic algo-
rithms, and best practices for selecting methods and tools to 
build predictive models. Major software tools are used to apply 
predictive modeling in a wide range of domains for improved 
decision-making in real business situations.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
297
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
DATA 650 Big Data Analytics (6)
Prerequisite: DATA 640. An introduction to concepts, 
approaches, and techniques in managing and analyzing large 
data sets for improved decision-making in real business 
situations. Topics include text analytics, sentiment analysis, 
stream analytics, AI, and cognitive computing. Discussion 
also covers how to identify the kinds of analyses to use with 
big data and how to interpret the results. Advanced tools and 
basic approaches are used to query and explore data using the 
Hadoop platform and in-memory analytical tools like Spark ML.
DATA 670 Data Analytics Capstone (6)
Prerequisite: DATA 650. Completion of a major analytics project 
designed to integrate knowledge and skills gained from previ-
ous coursework and provide a complete analytics experience, 
including problem scoping (framing), data set preparation, 
comprehensive data analysis and visualization, and predictive 
model development. Several peer-reviewed presentations are 
included to enhance the ability to “tell the story” and explain 
project approach and results. Projects are selected from student 
organizations, special government agency requests, or other 
faculty-approved sources. The project culminates in a complete 
analytics report and presentation.
Database Systems 
Technology 
DBST 651 Relational Database Systems (3)
An introduction to relational databases, one of the most per-
vasive technologies today. Presentation covers fundamental 
concepts necessary for the design, use, and implementation 
of relational database systems. Focus is on basic concepts 
of database modeling and design, the languages and facilities 
provided by database management systems, and techniques 
for implementing relational database systems. Topics include 
implementation concepts and techniques for database design, 
query optimization, concurrency control, recovery, and integrity. 
A foundation for managing databases in important environ-
ments is provided. Assignments require use of a remote  
access laboratory.
DBST 652 Advanced Relational/Object-Relational 
Database Systems (3)
Prerequisite: DBST 651. A continuation of the study of rela-
tional database systems, exploring advanced concepts. Topics 
include logical design, physical design, performance, architec-
ture, data distribution, and data sharing in relational databases. 
The concepts of object-relational design and implementation 
are introduced and developed. Assignments require the use  
of a remote access laboratory.
DBST 660 Advanced Data Modeling (3)
Prerequisite: DBST 651. An introduction to fundamental con-
cepts and techniques for successfully designing databases for 
structured and unstructured data. Topics include database qual-
ity techniques and relational, dimensional, and NoSQL modeling, 
as well as best practices for selecting methods and modeling 
tools to design the database models (relational, dimensional, 
wide column, document, and graph/RDF). Assignments require 
the use of a remote access laboratory.
DBST 663 Distributed Database Management Systems (3)
Prerequisite: DBST 651. An introduction to the development  
of distributed database management, focusing on concepts  
and technical issues. Survey covers distributed database  
management systems, including architecture, distributed 
database design, query processing and optimization, distributed 
transaction management and concurrency control, distributed 
and heterogeneous object management systems, and  
database inoperability.
DBST 665 Data Warehouse Technologies (3)
Prerequisite: DBST 651. An introduction to technology 
approaches for successfully designing and implementing  
a data warehouse for structured and unstructured data. Topics 
include data modeling techniques; extraction, transformation, 
and loading of data; performance challenges; and system  
tradeoffs in the development of the warehouse environment. 
Assignments require use of a remote access laboratory.
DBST 667 Data Mining (3)
Prerequisite: DBST 651. An overview of the data mining 
component of the knowledge discovery process. Data mining 
applications are introduced, and algorithms and techniques use-
ful for solving different problems are identified. Topics include 
the application of well-known statistical, machine learning, 
and database algorithms, including decision trees, similarity 
measures, regression, Bayes theorem, nearest neighbor, neural 
networks, and genetic algorithms. Discussion also covers 
researching data mining applications and integrating data  
mining with data warehouses.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
298
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
DBST 668 Database Security (3)
Prerequisite: DBST 651. An overview of both the theory of 
and applications for providing effective security in database 
management systems. Topics include conceptual frameworks 
for discretionary and mandatory access control, data integrity, 
availability and performance, secure database design, data 
aggregation, data inference, secure concurrency control, and 
secure transactions processing. Models for multilevel secure 
databases for both relational and object-relational databases 
are analyzed. Assignments focus on database security con-
cepts and require use of a remote access laboratory.
DBST 670 Database Systems Technology Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: 30 credits of program coursework, including 
all core courses. An introduction to the knowledge, skills, and 
tools needed to successfully administer operational database 
systems. The conceptual and operational tools for analysis and 
resolution of problems such as performance, recovery, design, 
and technical issues are provided. Tools used to assist in the 
administration process are also included.
Decisive Communication 
and Leadership 
DCL 600M Decisive Thinking, Communicating,  
and Leading in Multidisciplinary Fields (6)
(Applicable to the Acquisition and Contract Management,  
Learning Design and Technology, Strategic Communications, 
and Transformational Leadership programs). Prepare for 
academic and professional success by developing skills that 
employers want in their employees. Explore your area of study 
to learn how it connects with your career aspirations, create a 
professional social network presence, and use critical thinking 
to inform decisions. Improve and refine your skills in communi-
cation, critical thinking, quantitative reasoning, and team leader-
ship. Hone your professional writing and oral communication 
skills to produce effective presentations, and become proficient 
with spreadsheets, collaboration tools, and other professional 
software. Students may receive credit for only one of the follow-
ing courses: CBR 600, DCL 600M, DCL 600T, or PRO 600.
DCL 600T Decisive Thinking, Communicating,  
and Leading in Technology Fields (6)
(Applicable to the Cloud Computing Systems and Cyber Opera-
tions programs). Prepare for academic and professional suc-
cess by developing skills that employers want in their employ-
ees. Explore your area of study to learn how it connects with 
your career aspirations, create a professional social network 
presence, and use critical thinking to inform decisions. Improve 
and refine your skills in communication, critical thinking, quan-
titative reasoning, and team leadership. Hone your professional 
writing and oral communication skills to produce effective 
presentations, and become proficient with spreadsheets, col-
laboration tools, and other professional software. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: CBR 600, 
DCL 600M, DCL 600T, or PRO 600.
Digital Forensics and 
Cyber Investigations 
Courses in digital forensics and cyber investigation (designated 
DFC) have higher computing requirements than the minimum 
technical requirements stated on p. 26. They require an Intel 
Core i7 processor or higher, with speeds of 2GHz or faster, at 
least 6GB of available disk space, and at least 16GB RAM (32GB 
recommended). Display devices should have a resolution of 
1920 X 1080 or better (PCs) or 1440 X 900 retina display (Mac).
DFC 610 Cyberspace and Cybersecurity Foundations (6)
Prerequisite: CBR 600. Gain knowledge of the foundations of 
cybersecurity, and apply cyber methodologies to cyber architec-
tures, services, protocols, algorithms, hardware and software 
components, and programming languages. Become familiar with 
the important role that business continuity planning, security  
management practices, security architecture, operations security, 
and physical security play in cybersecurity. Explore the impact 
of cyber terrorism and national security on cybersecurity. Gain 
hands-on, real-world experience with state-of-the-art tools and 
technologies in a lab-intensive environment. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: DFC 610  
or CST 610.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
299
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
DFC 620 Digital Forensics Technology and Practices (6)
Prerequisite: DFC 610. Gain proficiency with the tools and tech-
nologies commonly used in forensic examinations and utilize 
best practices. Explore procedures for securing and validating 
evidence, including digital media and physical memory, as well 
as recovering artifacts and analyzing, reporting, and presenting 
results in both criminal and civil situations. Gain experience 
with mobile forensic analysis. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: CST 640 or DFC 620.
DFC 630 Digital Forensic Response and Analysis (6)
Prerequisite: DFC 620. Utilize tools and techniques in digital 
forensic investigations involving workstation and mobile plat-
forms. Practice forensic artifact reconstruction and recovery 
from the file systems of different operating systems, including 
Windows, Linux, and Macintosh.
DFC 640 Advanced Forensics (6)
Prerequisite: DFC 630. Assume the role of a digital forensics 
professional. Collect and preserve network, server, and cloud-
based evidence, and apply analysis techniques. Solve technical 
challenges such as evidentiary volume and encryption, as well 
as nontechnical challenges such as jurisdiction and distance in 
situation-based response scenarios and activities.
Distance Education 
OMDE 601 Foundations of Distance Education  
and E-Learning (3)
A study of the history and evolution of distance education. 
Social and political/economic factors, theories, learning and 
teaching models, technology and media innovations, institu-
tions and systems, and major writers that have shaped the 
development of the field are critically examined. A variety of 
technologies are used to support the development of founda-
tional skills that are integral to current practice.
OMDE 603 Technology in Distance Education  
and E-Learning (3)
Prerequisites: OMDE 601 and OMDE 610. A review of the history 
and the terminology of technology used in distance education. 
The basic technology building blocks of hardware, networks, 
and software are identified. Analysis covers the characteris-
tics of asynchronous and synchronous technologies and tools 
used in teaching and learning, as well as the administration of 
distance education. The relationship between technology and 
the goals of the educational/training organization are critically 
examined. The relationship between information technol-
ogy (especially online technology) and distance education is 
explored. Topics include the criteria and guidelines for selecting 
technologies for distance education and the future directions of 
technology in distance education.
OMDE 606 Costs and Economics of Distance Education 
and E-Learning (3)
Prerequisites: OMDE 603 and OMDE 608. A study of the eco-
nomics of distance education in the larger context of the eco-
nomics of education. A variety of methodological approaches 
(including cost/benefit and cost/effectiveness analyses) are 
applied to the distance education context. A variety of costing 
techniques and economic models are explored and applied to 
different institutional forms and levels of distance education.
OMDE 608 Learner Support in Distance Education  
and Training (3)
An introduction to the theories and concepts of support for  
learners in distance education and training. Various types of 
learner support, including tutoring and teaching; advising and 
counseling; and library, registrar, and other administrative serv-
ices, are examined. Discussion addresses management issues, 
such as planning, organizational models, staffing and staff 
development, designing services to meet learner needs, serv- 
ing special groups, and evaluation and applied research.
OMDE 610 Teaching and Learning in Online  
Distance Education (3)
An exploration of the online teaching and learning dynamic, 
including its theoretical foundation and best practices. The 
themes that shape the online teaching/learning relationship  
are addressed through individual and collaborative projects. 
Topics include philosophical frameworks; instructional, social, 
and cognitive presence; interaction, collaboration, and partici-
pation; community and engagement; and administration  
and management.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
300
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
OMDE 670 Portfolio and Research Project in Distance 
Education and E-Learning (3)
Prerequisites: DEPM 604 and DETT 621. A capstone study 
of distance education and training designed to demonstrate 
cumulative knowledge and skills through two major projects: an 
electronic portfolio and a case study. The personal e-portfolio 
documents credentials and accomplishments to date and 
also serves as an ongoing resource and record of continuing 
professional development. The case study, which focuses on a 
distance education/training program or organization, involves 
in-depth analysis of the setting and application of concepts and 
strategies to enhance practice and performance in distance 
education and training.
Distance Education Policy 
and Management 
DEPM 604 Management and Leadership in Distance 
Education and E-Learning (3)
Prerequisites: DETT 607 and DETC 620. An introduction to the 
organization, management, and administration of distance edu-
cation and e-learning training programs and systems. Topics 
include management theory and practice, organizational behav-
ior and change, leadership roles and styles, and planning and 
policy. Discussion covers education and training in academic 
and corporate settings and the knowledge and skills necessary 
for a distance education practitioner to function effectively  
in either type of organizational environment. Assignments 
include individual and group case-study analyses, brief essays, 
and literature searches related to distance education and 
e-learning leadership.
DEPM 609 Distance Education and  
E-Learning Systems (3)
Prerequisite: OMDE 601, OMDE 603, and OMDE 608. An intro-
duction to frameworks for analyzing the nature of distance 
education from a functionalist, interpretive, or emancipatory 
systems approach. Appropriate diagramming techniques are 
used as a means to examine the organization and management 
of distance education systems.
DEPM 622 The Business of Distance Education  
and E-Learning (3)
Prerequisites: DEPM 604 and DETT 621. An examination  
of the highly competitive global business environment for 
distance education and training. Topics include the supply 
and demand of education services in emerging and existing 
markets, the competitive positioning of organizations, and 
increasing reliance on collaborations. Emphasis is on the skills 
distance education managers need in planning and developing 
programs, products, and services that are targeted to specific 
markets and cost-effective.
DEPM 625 Global Strategies, Perspectives,  
and Practices for Open and Distance Education (3)
A study of the development and current landscape of global, 
open, and distance education across developed and developing 
countries. Topics include cross-border partnerships, emerg-
ing business models, academic quality, cultural and linguistic 
opportunities and challenges, and innovative packaging of con-
tent (including MOOCs and open educational resources). Global 
professional and international associations (e.g., UNESCO, ICDE, 
AAOU, OECD, EDEN, USDLA, and the World Bank); resources 
offered by these organizations; and their diverse roles in pro-
moting internationalism, global trade, and quality assurance 
and management of global educational services are compared 
and contrasted. Examples and case studies are provided for 
comparative analyses among a variety of open and distance 
learning providers, representing single- and dual-mode institu-
tions and open and distance learning universities and organi-
zations from developed and developing countries, as well as 
private-sector providers and government agencies.
DEPM 650 Practitioner Research in Distance Education 
and E-Learning (3)
Prerequisites: OMDE 601, OMDE 603, and OMDE 608. An 
introduction to a variety of quantitative and qualitative research 
methods used in the social sciences as applied in distance edu-
cation and e-learning. Emphasis is on planning and designing 
research and evaluation projects, including choosing appropriate 
methods of investigation and learning the practical aspects of 
quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis. Major 
research paradigms are explored, and an overview of the various 
research fields in distance education and e-learning is provided. 
The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) is used 
to manage and analyze data. Skills in collecting quantitative and 
qualitative data and in analyzing, interpreting, and reporting the 
results of empirical investigations are developed.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
301
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Distance Education 
Teaching and Training 
DETT 607 Instructional Design and Course Development 
in Distance Education and E-Learning (3)
Prerequisites: OMDE 606 and DETT 611. An examination of the 
instructional design process, its history and place in today’s 
course development efforts, and the use of instructional design 
components in practice. Emphasis is on the nature of learning 
and the requirements for effective instructional design in online 
and blended environments. The theoretical underpinnings of 
learning are explored and applied to the design of a prototype 
classroom. Management issues surrounding course and cur-
riculum development efforts are discussed, and a comprehen-
sive project plan is developed for design implementation.
DETT 611 Library and Intellectual Property Issues  
in Distance Education and E-Learning (3)
Prerequisites: OMDE 603 and OMDE 608. An overview of the 
development and delivery of digital resources for distance 
education. Discussion covers the intellectual property issues 
affecting the use of copyrighted works in distance education, 
developing and delivering library resources online to a faculty 
and student population, and the future of digital information 
delivery and the impact of digital rights management (DRM) 
technologies and social networking.
DETT 621 Online Learning and Development  
in the Workplace (3)
Prerequisites: DETT 607 and DETC 620. An examination of 
distance learning and professional development in the business 
sector. Discussion covers various issues, problems, and solu-
tions related to distance learning and professional development 
in the workplace. Topics include knowledge management, per-
formance improvement, delivery of learning and development, 
and evaluating learning and development.
Distance Education 
Technology 
DETC 620 Training and Learning with Multimedia (3)
Prerequisites: OMDE 606 and DETT 611. An overview of the use 
of digital media in a variety of educational settings, designed to 
identify properties, strengths, and weaknesses of multimedia in 
different learning contexts. The basic psychological processes 
of perception, understanding, and learning with multimedia are 
introduced. Focus is on multimedia and instructional design for 
online learning systems, such as learning management systems 
or stand-alone learning objects. Hands-on experience with 
several multimedia applications is provided. Topics include col-
laborative learning technologies, open educational resources, 
the impact of multimedia on learning outcomes, methods of 
multimedia evaluation, quality assurance, and project manage-
ment of e-learning initiatives.
DETC 630 Emerging Technology Trends and Issues  
in Distance Education and E-Learning (3)
An examination of emerging and advanced technologies that 
affect teaching and learning, as well as areas of support and 
management, in the field of distance education. Topics include 
emerging synchronous and asynchronous technology functions, 
mobile technologies, and social media tools for development 
and delivery, as well as technologies used in providing learner, 
faculty, and managerial support to distance education. Tech-
nologies are explored critically in both a theoretical and applied 
contexts. Analysis covers trends and critical issues associated 
with the adoption of such technologies.
Education: Teacher 
Preparation 
EDTP 600 Foundations of Teaching for Learning (6)
Preparation for effective entry into the classroom as a teacher. 
Topics include teaching in the contemporary school; human 
development; approaches to learning, diversity, and collabora-
tion beyond the classroom; learners with exceptional needs; 
curriculum, instruction, and assessment; teaching in the con-
tent area; and synthesis and application. Course materials and 
assignments focus on documents created and/or typically uti-
lized by school systems and incorporate current school district 
initiatives. School district personnel may participate as guests.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
302
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
EDTP 635 Adolescent Development and  
Learning Needs (6)
Prerequisite or corequisite: EDTP 600. Preparation to sup-
port the unique development of adolescents from various 
backgrounds, with varying beliefs and abilities. Learners are 
examined from the standpoint of developmental characteristics; 
social, cultural, racial, and gender affiliation; socioeconomic 
status; religious influences; learning styles; special needs; and 
exceptionality. Adolescents are also examined from biological, 
psychological, cognitive, and social perspectives; within the tap-
estry of their family and community; and through the influences 
of societal and cultural norms. Discussion covers theories and 
concepts associated with human growth and development 
across the lifespan, focusing on the typical and atypical devel-
opment of the adolescent.
EDTP 639 Reading and Multiple Literacies (6)
(Formerly EDRS 610.) Prerequisites: EDTP 600 and EDTP 635. 
A study of the essentials of literacy for middle and high school 
classrooms, including design principles for guided inquiry, 
self-directed learning, collaboration, and effective use of media 
to meet the needs of diverse learners in the 21st century. 
Discussion covers purposes and types of reading, assessment, 
cognitive strategies in reading, reading strategy instruction 
for constructing meaning from text, and intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivational strategies. Topics include essential competencies 
for teaching and learning content area reading and the new 
literacies and for applying and adapting them to diverse learn-
ers and learners with exceptionalities. Competencies developed 
include use of evidence-based instructional strategies, forma-
tive and summative assessment, critical thinking, technology 
as a tool for learning, and literate environments. Focus is on the 
importance of research, collaboration, and self-assessment for 
the professional development of teachers.
EDTP 645 Subject Methods and Assessment (6)
(Only available in spring and fall terms.) Prerequisites: EDTP 
600 and EDTP 635. An introduction to instructional strategies 
and curriculum for teaching secondary content that emphasizes 
effective instruction based on understanding assessment and 
how assessment informs effective instruction. Topics include 
development of comprehensive assessment strategies and their 
interrelationships with the creation of learning objectives, selec-
tion of instructional techniques, and preparation of instructional 
plans. Current trends in secondary school structures, issues of 
traditional and authentic assessments, and teacher effect on 
student achievement are explored. Focus is on meeting individ-
ual needs and using content knowledge to inform instructional 
practice by drawing on knowledge gained through previous 
study and knowledge bases that reflect current research and 
best practices in secondary content areas.
EDTP 650 Professional Internship and Seminar (6) 
Prerequisites: EDTP 600, EDTP 635, EDTP 645, and EDTP 639. 
An opportunity to apply the concepts, techniques, methods, 
and theories learned in previous coursework and field-based 
experiences through a professional internship. Internship activi-
ties require completing observations, activities, and clinical 
practice in an approved secondary classroom appropriate for 
the selected content area certification, under the supervision of 
a school-based mentor teacher and a university field supervi-
sor. An ongoing seminar establishes a learning community that 
ensures a continuing support system and provides a forum for 
feedback and discussion of common readings, experiences, 
questions, and issues. An electronic portfolio is completed.
EDTP 650A Continuing Professional Internship  
and Seminar (1) 
Prerequisites: EDTP 600, EDTP 635, EDTP 639, and EDTP 645 
and department approval. An additional opportunity to complete 
seminar requirements and the professional internship for the 
Master of Arts in Teaching. May be repeated to a maximum  
of 3 credits.
Emergency Management 
EMAN 600 Comprehensive Crisis and  
Emergency Management (3)
An analysis of all hazards, phases (mitigation, preparedness, 
response, and recovery), and actors involved in crisis and 
emergency management. Discussion covers the definition of 
crises, emergencies, and disasters and concepts and issues 
in crisis and emergency management. Focus is on developing 
crisis, contingency, and incident management plans. Current 
frameworks, management systems, and command systems 
for organizing a response, deploying resources, managing the 
response organization, supporting crisis communication, and 
making decisions in a turbulent environment are examined. Top-
ics are discussed from U.S. and international perspectives.
EMAN 610 Hazard Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (3)
An examination of risk, hazard, and vulnerability. Topics include 
systematic hazard risk assessment, risk mitigation (reduction), 
risk transfer, and risk analysis. Discussion covers contemporary 
approaches to risk assessment and management of naturally  
or technologically induced hazards. Environmental hazard 
assessment is also examined. Seminal works published in  
the area are reviewed.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
303
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
EMAN 620 Information Technology  
in Emergency Management (3)
An overview of the role of information in crisis and response 
management. Discussion covers disaster and crisis information 
requirements; information technologies and decision support 
tools applied to crisis, disaster, and emergency management; 
and information problems encountered during emergencies. 
Tools used include the global positioning system (GPS), geo-
graphical information systems (GIS), UAS (drones), and hazard 
and emergency management-related software packages, as well 
as decision analysis methods. Assignments include practical 
case studies.
EMAN 630 Crisis Communication  
for Emergency Managers (3)
An exploration of current strategies and tactics for manag-
ing the range of communication responsibilities and issues 
that arise during a variety of crisis situations. Traditional and 
new media methods for analyzing crisis and communications 
management issues (including the use of current technologies) 
are applied using relevant public relations research, theory, and 
case examples. A strategic approach is used to better identify 
issues, goals, stakeholders, messaging, and other aspects 
involved in developing community-specific public responses  
to crisis situations.
EMAN 670 Seminar in Emergency  
Management Leadership (3)
Prerequisite: 30 credits, including all core and specialization 
courses except MGMT 670. An examination of the role, mission, 
and functional skills of the emergency manager that compares 
and contrasts current aspects with evolving trends. Factors that 
affect successful leadership in emergency management such 
as managing crises, disasters, and emergencies are explored 
through discussion of key issues and analysis of selected case 
studies. Discussion covers the evolving multidisciplinary nature 
of the emergency manager’s job and characteristics and leader-
ship styles most effective in emergency management. Sum-
mary reviews of various theories, models, historical examples, 
and practical applications are used to reflect the central 
activities of emergency managers and gain a better perspec-
tive on the emergency manager’s job. Topics include planning, 
risk assessment, crisis communications, organizational and 
operational issues, problem-solving, overcoming bureaucratic 
barriers to effective performance, promoting a culture of disas-
ter prevention and preparedness, advising on business continu-
ity strategies, acquiring resources, staff training, and emergency 
exercises. Ethics and legal issues in emergency management, 
the procurement of facilities, staff management, and controver-
sies are also examined.
Environmental 
Management 
ENVM 600 Fundamentals of Environmental Systems (3)
An introduction to the basics of natural environmental systems 
and human disruptions to and their influences on environmen-
tal systems. The aim is to explore Earth’s systems, including 
the biosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, and lithosphere, and 
how the processes of these systems interact to support life in 
the Anthropocene. Topics include basic scientific principles in 
chemistry, physics, geology, and ecology and concepts related 
to the environmental field, including risk.
ENVM 610 Environmental/Energy Law and Policy (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: ENVM 600. An introduction to envi-
ronmental/energy law and policy. The goal is to gain a deeper 
understanding of the current environmental landscape and  
provide a pathway for continual improvement with critical use  
of available environmental/energy law and policy resources.  
A critical systems-thinking approach to environmental/energy 
law and policy is used. Discussion explores how legislation and 
policies form society and, with the use of models, examines 
changes that can be implemented for a more sustainable future. 
Topics include the history of U.S. environmental/energy law and 
policy, the legislative process, the administrative process, use  
of policy memos, modeling, and key pieces of energy and envi-
ronmental legislation.
ENVM 641 Environmental Auditing (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: ENVM 615. An examination of meth-
ods for attaining statutory, regulatory, and permitting compli-
ance. The protection of workers and other stakeholders is also 
examined in the context of organizational, budgetary, and other 
constraints. Emphasis is on methods of defining auditing objec-
tives to meet organizational goals and of designing auditing 
programs for effective compliance under each of the 12 major 
environmental statutes, including air, water, solid, and hazardous 
waste management laws and pollution prevention initiatives.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
304
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ENVM 643 Environmental Communications  
and Reporting (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: ENVM 615. An intensive examina-
tion of environmental communications and reporting, focusing 
on building the communication skills needed by environmental 
managers. The goal is to communicate ethically, effectively, and 
with cultural competence with diverse environmental stake-
holders. Discussion covers how history, ethics, justice, diverse 
perspectives, and reflexivity relate to environmental communi-
cation; environmental reporting; and science, public health, risk, 
and climate communications. Emphasis is on developing key 
professional skills, including scientific literacy and numeracy, 
power and reflexivity, public speaking, data design and visual-
ization, meeting hosting and facilitation, and writing and editing 
technical products.
ENVM 647 Environmental Risk Assessment (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: ENVM 615. An examination of the 
general concepts of risk assessment as applied to human and 
environmental health. The goal is to incorporate environmental 
justice considerations, regulatory compliance, and best prac-
tices into risk assessment and mitigation recommendations 
for sustainable and ethical environmental management. Topics 
include ecological and human risk assessment; risk perception 
and communication; regulatory requirements; and the appli-
cation of databases, models, and tools to characterize risk. 
Discussions support the development of skill sets in performing 
human health and ecological risk assessments.
ENVM 649 Principles and Practices  
of Waste Management (3)
Prerequisite: ENVM 615. An examination of the principles and 
practices of waste management, especially as they apply to the 
United States. The goal is to incorporate environmental justice 
considerations, regulatory compliance, and best practices 
toward integrative waste management. Topics include history 
of waste management, options, and hierarchy for municipal 
waste management in the United States, basics of technologi-
cal options for waste management, and U.S. policies that over-
see municipal waste and hazardous waste. Focus is on apply-
ing waste management principles to viable integrated waste 
management solutions and applying the skills and knowledge 
needed for a career in environmental management.
ENVM 650 Environmental and Natural  
Resources Economics (3)
Prerequisite: ENVM 615. An introduction to environmental and 
resource economics. The goal is to grasp the basics of micro-
economics and apply the subfields of environmental economics 
and natural resource economics to an integrative approach 
to environmental issues today. Topics include microeconom-
ics and the subfields of environmental economics and natural 
resource economics, their evaluation tools and techniques, and 
policy approaches and considerations to their applications. 
Activities incorporate team building and project management 
skills to work on projects based on these topics.
ENVM 651 Water Resources Management (3)
Prerequisite: ENVM 615. A comprehensive examination of 
integrated water resource management in the 21st century. 
Focus is on how to holistically manage watersheds, such 
as the Chesapeake Bay, Colorado River, or Mississippi River 
Basins. The objective is to build practical skills and disposi-
tions, including developing viable management solutions to 
water quality, quantity, use, and access challenges; integrating 
multidisciplinary data; communicating with stakeholders and 
policymakers; and applying environmental justice practices. 
Topics include water governance, policy, markets, and institu-
tions; history of water and land use decisions; indigenous and 
local community engagement; and the impact of global climate 
change on water resources.
ENVM 652 Principles of Air Quality Management (3)
Prerequisite: ENVM 615. A comprehensive examination of the 
dynamics and challenges of air quality management in the  
21st century. Focus is on applying criteria and hazardous air pol-
lutants regulations in your locality, analyzing the identified differ-
ences in local air quality issues, and examining global and local 
air quality, especially for regulated air pollutants. The goals are to 
explore the disparities resulting from differing criteria pollutants 
and hazardous air pollutants and to design and implement viable 
indoor and outdoor air quality management solutions. Topics 
include global CO2 emissions, global climate change, and viable 
air quality management solutions.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
305
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ENVM 653 Land Use Management (3)
Prerequisite: ENVM 615. An overview of land use management 
and its application to specific locations. The goal is to apply a 
foundational understanding of ecosystems and environmental/
energy law and policy to land use concepts and management 
authorities on land use. Discussions explore land use concepts 
and encourage the sharing of local issues in a global context. 
Topics include the history of land use management, decision-
making processes related to land use, and climate adaptation 
and mitigation plans. Land use issues are explored using Geo-
graphic Information System (GIS) software and other tools.
ENVM 670 Capstone Study in  
Environmental Management (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of 27 credits of program coursework. 
An intensive hands-on study of an environmental manage-
ment issue in partnership with an environmental organization. 
The goals are to demonstrate knowledge, skills, abilities, and 
dispositions gained from previous. Topics vary from semester to 
semester, depending on the sponsor environmental organization. 
Activities involve group participation in a real-life practicum with 
the sponsor organization and focus on solving a part of a larger 
environmental issue. Discussions support content learning, proj-
ect management, and team building, using reflexivity exercises.
Financial Management 
FIN 605 Fintech and Decision-Making (3)
An examination of financial decision-making, core finance 
principles, and objectives of financial management. Discussion 
covers prerequisites for making effective financial decisions, 
including financial reporting systems (balance sheets, profit and 
loss statements, and cash flow statements), costing and budget-
ing, and cost-volume-profit (CVP) analysis. Topics also include 
techniques for and approaches to new technologies (AI, deep 
learning, blockchain technology, open APIs) that are disrupting 
the financial services industry, supply chain management, and 
costing practices. Financial sectors are examined for specific 
opportunities, such as payments, credit, and risk management.
FIN 610 Financial Management in Organizations (3)
An investigation of financial management theory and applica-
tions in organizations. Discounted cash flow and rate-of-return 
analyses are used to evaluate projects and financial instru-
ments. Discussion covers the role of the cost of capital and  
the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) in capital investment 
analysis and selection. Capital budgeting, stock, and bond 
valuation, break-even analysis, capital market efficiency, real 
options, short-term financial management, and international 
finance are introduced.
FIN 615 Financial Analysis and Modeling (3)
Prerequisite: FIN 610. An exploration of how financial managers 
use financial modeling, analysis, and research to build forecasts 
and projections, evaluate financial alternatives, and support 
financial decision-making in both operational and strategic con-
texts. Models are developed using Microsoft Excel; exercises 
and extended case studies are utilized to interpret and employ 
results. Topics include financial statements and ratio analysis, 
cash flow forecasting, operations budgeting, breakeven and 
leverage analysis, time value of money applications, and capital 
budgeting and risk assessment.
FIN 620 Long-Term Financial Management (3)
Prerequisite: FIN 610. An exploration of the long-term financial 
needs of an organization and the roles of capital markets. Topics 
include the financial environment of organizations, options and 
futures instruments, long-term financing, the capital budgeting 
decision process, capital structure management, dividend and 
share repurchase policy, and investment banking and restructur-
ing. Various types of long-term funding sources—including term 
loans, derivatives, debt and equity securities, and leasing—are 
analyzed. Alternate policies with regard to financial leverage, 
capital structure, dividends, and the issuance of preferred stock 
are evaluated. Mergers, leveraged buyouts, and divestitures are 
examined as special situations to create value.
FIN 630 Investment Valuation (3)
Prerequisite: FIN 610. An in-depth exploration and application 
of valuation models to support managerial decision-making in a 
strategic framework. The theory, concepts, and principles under-
lying the valuation of firms, business/product lines, and merg-
ers and acquisitions are addressed using extended exercises 
and applications. The discounted cash flow model is used as a 
tool. Discussion covers the financial drivers of value, including 
assessing and determining risk, competitive advantage period, 
and sales and earnings growth estimates. Other valuation tech-
niques using earnings, revenues, and price/earnings multiples 
are also discussed and applied in selected examples.
FIN 640 Multinational Financial Management (3)
Prerequisite: FIN 610. A study of financial management issues in 
multinational organizations. Topics include the environment of 
international financial management, foreign exchange markets, 
risk management, multinational working capital management, 
and foreign investment analysis. The financing of foreign opera-
tions, international banking, and the role of financial manage-
ment in maintaining global competitiveness are also considered.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
306
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
FIN 645 Behavioral Finance (3)
Prerequisite: FIN 610. A study of the key psychological obsta- 
cles to value-maximizing behavior and steps that managers 
can take to mitigate their effects, using the traditional tools of 
corporate finance. Focus is on understanding the underlying 
factors and processes that result in nonoptimal decision-making 
by financial managers. Topics include perceptions about risk and 
reward and financial decision-making in the areas of investing, 
trading, valuation, capital budgeting, capital structure, dividend 
policy, agency conflicts, corporate governance, and mergers and 
acquisitions. The key role played by emotions and recent find-
ings from neuroscience are explored.
FIN 660 Strategic Financial Management (3)
Prerequisite: FIN 610. An integrative study of financial man-
agement through applied problems and case studies. Topics 
reflect the changing environment of financial management in 
organizations and include capital investment decision-making, 
the role of intangibles in value creation, financial performance 
metrics, strategic financial planning and control, strategic 
valuation decisions, growth strategies for increasing value, the 
restructuring of financial processes, corporate governance and 
ethics, value-based management, strategic cost management, 
and the impact of information technology on the organization’s 
financial systems. A finance simulation is used as an integrat-
ing mechanism.
Global Health 
Management 
GHMT 620 National and International Approaches  
to Health Care Delivery (3)
(For students in the Global Health Management certificate 
program.) A project-based application of the concepts, theories, 
and principles of global health to the practical challenges facing 
global health professionals. Assignments focus on a specific 
global health priority for a given national or geopolitically defined 
population. Needs assessment methodologies—including epide-
miological methods; mapping local, national, and global policy 
processes; identifying strategies for building infrastructure and 
workforce capacity; analyzing financial opportunities and limita-
tions; and assessing the impact of macro changes in the global 
economy, political environment, and human rights and legal 
systems—are applied. Findings regarding the scope, options, and 
outcomes of these assessments, as well as a recommended 
action plan for improving the health status of the population 
group of interest, are summarized in the final project.
GHMT 640 Strategic Management of Global  
Health Services (6)
(For students in the Global Health Management certificate  
program.) The development of strategic management skills  
for growing and operating health organizations and health  
systems in low- and middle-resourced countries. Focus is on 
building strategies for organizing global health prevention, treat-
ment, care, and capacity-building initiatives. Strategic manage-
ment skills are applied to create global health missions and 
goals, core functions and organizational structures, clinical  
and administrative workforces, budgets and financing, and  
communication messages.
Healthcare 
Administration 
HCAD 600 Introduction to Healthcare Administration (3)
An introduction to the principles of management and leader-
ship as the foundations for the administration of healthcare 
products and service delivery. A comprehensive examination of 
the complex, dynamic, rapidly changing healthcare system in 
the United States is provided. Topics include the healthcare sys-
tem’s major components and their characteristics. Emphasis is 
on current problems in healthcare financing and delivery. Social, 
economic, and political forces that have shaped and continue to 
influence the system are traced. The healthcare system in the 
United States is compared with systems in industrialized and 
developing nations. Analysis covers current trends in healthcare 
and prospects for the future.
HCAD 610 Information Technology for Healthcare 
Administration (3)
An overview of information technology (IT) from a managerial 
perspective and how healthcare administrators can use IT to 
maximize organizational performance. Fundamental principles 
of IT and data management and their implications for health-
care administrators are reviewed. Discussion explores the use 
of technology, databases, and other analytical tools to structure, 
analyze, and present information related to healthcare manage-
ment and problem-solving. Current applications, such as patient 
care, administrative and strategic decision support, managed 
health, health information networks, and the internet, are exam-
ined to determine how they may be used to meet the challenges 
facing healthcare administrators today and in the future.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
307
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
HCAD 620 The U.S. Healthcare System (3)
A comprehensive examination of the complex, dynamic, rapidly 
changing healthcare system in the United States. The health-
care system in the United States is compared with systems in 
industrialized and developing nations. Analysis covers current 
trends in healthcare and prospects for the future. Ethics, beliefs, 
and values related to healthcare are discussed. Managerial 
functions and their effectiveness for health outcomes and orga-
nizational performance are investigated and evaluated. Market-
ing, quality of care, and effective decision-making are explored.
HCAD 625 The Business of Healthcare (3)
Prerequisite: HCAD 620. A detailed exploration of operational 
issues unique to the dynamic and highly regulated realm of 
healthcare. Discussion covers challenges presented by regula-
tory mandates, market forces, and multiple interconnected 
matrix organizations, as well as defining and meeting the needs 
of the community.
HCAD 630 Public Health Administration (3)
An in-depth study of the field of public health, emphasizing 
leadership and management. Current U.S. and global public 
health systems are analyzed, focusing on public health entities 
and their management issues. Topics include the history and 
current status of public health, core functions, legislation, ethics, 
accountability (including assessment and evaluation), and the 
politics and financing of public health, particularly in light of the 
increased utilization of evidence-based budgeting. Global health 
security, governance, and diplomacy are discussed in detail as 
they apply to public health issues and global community collabo-
ration. Structural determinants of health are examined in terms 
of their influence on healthcare delivery and public health issues.
HCAD 635 Long-Term Care Administration (3)
A study of the different components of the long-term care serv-
ice delivery system. Topics include residential settings (such as 
skilled nursing facilities, assisted living facilities, and continuing 
care retirement communities) as well as home care services, 
community-based service programs, and hospice care. The goal 
is to apply contemporary management theory, concepts, and 
models to the entities that make up the long-term care service 
delivery system. The specifics of long-term care management 
and leadership are discussed. Societal trends in attitudes and 
approaches to long-term care are defined and evaluated.
HCAD 640 Financial Management for Healthcare 
Organizations (3)
An in-depth study of healthcare economics and the financial 
management of healthcare organizations. The economic 
principles underlying the American healthcare market and the 
financial management of health services organizations within 
that market are examined. Analysis covers healthcare industry 
regulation, licensure, and certification and various coverage and 
healthcare payment mechanisms. Topics also include reim-
bursement mechanisms and their effect on healthcare provider 
organizations, managed care, capitation, and per case or per 
diagnosis payment, as well as how these financial strategies 
are utilized by third-party payers. Focus is on financial chal-
lenges, such as uncompensated care, cost increases, increased 
competition, and increased regulation, and how healthcare 
providers should respond to them. Ratio analysis, cost analysis, 
and other financial management techniques are also explored.
HCAD 645 Strategic Financial Management  
in Healthcare (3)
Prerequisite: HCAD 640. An in-depth study of the concepts 
and competencies needed to plan the usage and management 
of enterprise financial resources to achieve long-term orga-
nizational objectives and return maximum value in a volatile 
healthcare finance environment. Emphasis is on identifying and 
quantifying available or potential resources, devising a plan for 
utilizing finances and other capital resources to achieve goals, 
and capital budgeting and management. Topics also include 
risk analysis, multiple financing methods, supply chain costs, 
valuation, and mergers and acquisitions. Current accounts and 
working capital management are explored, as are strategic plan-
ning and financial forecasting. Macroeconomic principles are 
investigated as they relate to the healthcare system. Analysis 
covers free market and mixed market economies, barriers to 
free market economies, and the application of macroeconomics 
as an analytical tool to craft economic and fiscal policy.
HCAD 650 Legal Aspects of Healthcare Administration (3)
A comprehensive overview of the intersection of law, ethics, 
health information technology, and bioethics in various con-
texts. The principles of healthcare law are examined in the areas 
of privacy, information security, contracts, torts, the liability of 
healthcare providers, the rights of patients, employment law and 
labor relations, and administrative law for healthcare organiza-
tions, among others. The managerial function of compliance is 
explored as it applies to the law and ethics, and specific tools 
and strategies are defined and discussed.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
308
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
HCAD 660 Healthcare Institutional Organization  
and Management (3)
A study of the nature of management and how it is applied in 
various healthcare settings. Contemporary theories, critical 
perspectives, models, and best practices designed to foster 
performance excellence in the highly competitive healthcare 
environment are examined. Discussion covers principles of 
organizational behavior and culture development and adap-
tation. Consumer behavior and its influence on institutional 
sustainability are evaluated. Strategies for quality assurance 
and institutional change are explored.
HCAD 665 Strategic Issues in Healthcare Leadership (3)
Prerequisite: HCAD 660. An examination of strategic issues 
driving the future of healthcare. Focus is on identifying trends 
and preparing competent leaders to meet the needs of chang-
ing communities, integrating rapid technological and scientific 
advances, and ensuring health care institutional viability. Topics 
include development and dissemination of strategic goals and 
shaping organizational values, the effect of ethics and power on 
leadership decision-making, shared governance and collabora-
tion, and change and performance management.
HCAD 670 Healthcare Administration Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of 36 credits of program coursework. 
A capstone study of healthcare administration that integrates 
knowledge and skills gained from previous study in the devel-
opment of a systems approach to healthcare administration. 
Focus is on public and private healthcare delivery systems, 
alliances with internal and external environments, and strategic 
decision-making and implementation in the rapidly evolving 
global arena of healthcare administration.
Health Informatics 
Administration 
HIMS 645 Healthcare Databases and Medical  
Technology Integration (3)
An introduction to various forms of healthcare data and data 
collection techniques, as well as different types of databases 
and development methods for using databases in small to 
medium-size healthcare facilities. The objective is to develop 
flat file and relational databases using Microsoft Access and 
Microsoft Excel, demonstrate familiarity with SQL (Structured 
Query Language), Python language, and RStudio program; and 
design queries applicable for the decision-making process. 
Topics include principles of integrating medical and biomedical 
engineering equipment within healthcare facilities for automatic 
and secure data collection. 
HIMS 650 Health Informatics and Data Analytics (3)
The application of basic statistics and research methods in 
health information management. Focus is on the analysis of 
clinical and administrative data to assist in healthcare decision-
making, planning, policy development, and state- and national-
level reporting. Topics include compilation and analysis of 
healthcare data; identification of data sources, data collection 
methods, analytical and visualization techniques; data mining; 
and clinical and biomedical research and its implications for 
healthcare quality. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: HAIN 650 or HIMS 650.
HIMS 655 Health Data Management (3)
(Formerly HAIN 655.) A foundational overview of health infor-
matics/information management as a profession and as a 
subset of the healthcare delivery system. Health informatics/
information principles and practices are explored as they relate 
to the application, analysis, management, and architecture of 
health data. Topics include data mapping, data structures, clini-
cal terminology, and classification systems. Discussion also 
covers ICD-10, health record content, documentation standards, 
data management policies and procedures, meaningful use, 
data sources, and information governance.
HIMS 661 The Application of Information Technology  
in Healthcare Administration (3)
Prerequisite: HCAD 610 and HIMS 655. An overview of histori-
cal, current, and emerging health information systems and 
technologies. Focus is on applying a system life-cycle process 
to the adoption of an electronic health record system. Discus-
sion covers various ways that information technology can aid in 
operations management and the strategic decision-making proc-
ess. Topics include project management, clinical and decision 
support systems, report generation, data analytics, workflow 
processes, health information exchange, enterprise informa-
tion management, training and development, data quality, user 
interfaces, data capturing technologies, personal health records, 
population health, data safeguards, business intelligence, and 
artificial intelligence. 
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
309
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
HIMS 670 Health Information Management  
and Technology Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of 30 credits of program coursework, 
including HIMS 650, HIMS 655, and HIMS 661. A study of health 
information management and technology that focuses on the 
application of skills acquired through previous coursework. The 
aim is to examine effective and efficient management of health-
care organizations, health information usage compliance, and 
health information technology. Topics include the U.S. health-
care delivery systems, health information management, health 
technology, privacy and security of data collection and utiliza-
tion, and project management. Activities include participating  
in a health information technology-relevant project.
History
HIST 602 Military Leadership: Principles of War (1)
(Open only to graduate ROTC students.) A study of the nine 
classic principles of war, which guide the conduct of war at stra-
tegic, operational, and tactical levels and form the foundation of 
the art and science of the military profession. The aim is to use 
primary and secondary historical resources to explore how past 
theory and practice have shaped the underlying policy, strategic 
planning, and operational procedures of today’s military and 
national security agencies.
Homeland Security 
Management 
HSMN 610 Concepts in Homeland Security (3)
An overview of the basic concepts of homeland security, includ-
ing infrastructure protection, jurisdiction, and issues in technical 
areas such as interconnectivity and interoperability. The nation’s 
telecommunications and information technology networks are 
examined as both vulnerable assets and critical solutions.
HSMN 625 Critical Infrastructures (3)
Prerequisite: HSMN 610. An introduction to critical infrastruc-
ture assurance as a policy field. Review covers the concept 
of critical infrastructures and their interdependencies. Topics 
include the development of modern critical infrastructures, the 
reasons they have become central elements of 21st-century 
societies, efforts being made to safeguard them, and potential 
threats to their continued effective operation.
HSMN 630 Resilience Planning and Preparedness  
for Disaster Response and Recovery (3)
An in-depth examination of managerial strategies for devel-
oping and maintaining resilience in communities, the private 
sector, and the nation in the face of human-made, natural, and 
technological disruptions or catastrophes. Emphasis is on the 
importance of advanced planning. Techniques for performing 
risk assessments and potential impact analyses and for select-
ing appropriate risk treatments are explored. Discussion covers 
preparing to handle adverse events, responding to them, and 
recovering from them. Resilience management is explored within 
the context of a life cycle that includes programmatic review 
and continuous improvement planning. Actual and hypothetical 
cases are analyzed.
HSMN 640 Energy Infrastructure Security (3)
Prerequisite: HSMN 610. An in-depth exploration of the energy 
sector and homeland security, including resources, critical infra-
structure protection, and vulnerabilities. The goal is to under-
stand risk methodologies as applied to the energy industry. 
Topics include pipeline security, security of the electrical grid, 
cyber-dependence and SCADA systems. Energy is evaluated as 
a national security issue.
HSMN 670 Seminar in Homeland Security (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of 24 credits of program coursework, 
including HSMN 610, HSMN 625, HSMN 630, EMAN 620, INFA 
660, and BSBD 641. An up-to-date evaluation of vulnerabilities 
and protective countermeasures regarding various aspects  
of the nation’s critical infrastructure, with emphasis on the  
food and water supply. Topics include various threat profiles  
and actions by government, industry, independent institutions, 
and private citizens that might prevent attack from domestic  
or foreign sources and mitigate harmful consequences should 
such an attack occur. Discussion reviews the federal govern-
ment’s organization and management of food and water security 
and explores what further efforts might be made, building on  
the nation’s health system and engaging government at all  
levels. The singularly important roles of first responders are  
also analyzed.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
310
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Human Resource 
Management 
HRMD 610 Issues and Practices in Human  
Resource Management (3)
(Strongly recommended as the first course in the human 
resources management specialization.) An overview of the 
human resource management profession, including the theories, 
research, and issues related to human resource management 
within modern organizations. The roles, responsibilities, relation-
ships, functions, and processes of human resource manage-
ment are discussed from a systems perspective. Expectations 
of various stakeholders, such as government, employees, labor 
organizations, staff/line management, and executive manage-
ment, are explored. Particular attention is given to the general 
legal principles and provisions that govern human resource 
activities. The specialty areas of employee relations—staffing, 
human resource development, compensation, and organizational 
development—are described. Current topics, such as human 
resource information systems and globalization, are addressed.
HRMD 620 Employee and Labor Relations (3)
An investigation of the rights and responsibilities of employ-
ees and organizations in union and nonunion environments in 
the United States. The federal legal framework for collective 
bargaining is reviewed. Topics include common employment 
contract trends, topics, and issues, as well as all phases of 
unionization, from organizing through contract maintenance. 
Emphasis is on conflict management, negotiation, and alternate 
dispute resolution.
HRMD 630 Recruitment and Selection (3)
An examination of the initial phases of staffing, focusing on 
the hiring process. The contemporary roles, relationships, and 
processes of recruitment and selection in the human resource 
management system are investigated. Emphasis is on produc-
tivity factors (such as the use of technology) and quality factors 
(such as legal, ethical, and validity issues). Topics include 
international as well as domestic concerns and consideration 
of multiple staffing levels (such as executive managers and 
temporary employees). Current issues in private, not-for-profit, 
and/or public sectors are discussed.
HRMD 640 Job Analysis, Assessment,  
and Compensation (3)
A study of the interrelated aspects of human resource man-
agement, including job design, job analysis, job evaluation, 
employee compensation, incentives to productivity, employee 
motivation, and performance appraisal. A variety of approaches 
for analyzing, weighing, and specifying the detailed elements of 
positions within modern organizations are presented. Discus-
sion covers techniques for identifying and classifying the criti-
cal components of a job, defining the observable standards and 
measures, preparing and determining the job description and 
job worth, establishing equitable compensation for job perfor-
mance, and developing an executive compensation program. 
The interaction of compensation, worker motivation, perfor-
mance appraisal, and level of worker performance within the 
organization is examined.
HRMD 650 Organizational Development and Change (3)
A study of the issues, theories, and methodologies associ-
ated with organizational development and the management of 
change, with a major emphasis on organizational culture and 
organizational change processes. Topics include the diagnostic 
process, intervention strategies, and overcoming resistance to 
change. Techniques such as goal setting, team-development 
procedures, productivity and strategy interventions, and 
interpersonal-change models are examined.
HRMD 651 Current Perspectives in Training  
and Development (3)
An examination of the theories, research, skills, and issues 
related to one major aspect of human resource development, 
the management of organizational training services. The role 
of training in the workplace and adult learning models are 
investigated. Topics include curriculum management, program 
development, and operation management with an emphasis on 
design and delivery issues. The impact of technology, the global 
environment, and modern organizational structures are consid-
ered. Ethical issues are also discussed. Assignments include 
the development of training proposals or programs.
HRMD 665 Managing Virtual and Global Teams (3)
(Not open to students who have completed HRMD 621, HRMD 
652, or HRMD 660.) An investigation of the foundations of team 
development and performance from human resource manage-
ment and organizational behavior perspectives. Focus is on 
maximizing the effectiveness and efficiency of global and virtual 
teams in organizations. Topics include the impact of global 
diversity and use of technology on intergroup development, com-
munication, and outcomes. Scholarly research and field literature 
are examined and the implications of the findings for applied 
management are discussed.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
311
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Informatics 
IMAT 637 IT Acquisitions Management (3)
A study of management practices related to the acquisition 
of IT systems, components, and services. Emphasis is on the 
importance of enterprise strategic planning and the concomitant 
IT strategic planning. Issues related to the development of the 
IT acquisition plan, financial planning and budgeting, integra-
tion of the proposed acquisition within the overall goals of the 
enterprise, and related IT program management are examined 
in the context of overarching management challenges. Federal 
IT systems, contract and procurement policies, and procedures 
provide examples for analysis of concepts with wider relevance.
IMAT 639 Internet Multimedia Applications (3)
A study of multimedia presentations as essential, strategic 
components of an organization’s competitive web presence. 
Established principles of software development, aesthetics of 
typography and layout, benchmarking, and usability engineering 
are used to analyze websites and write successful site develop-
ment plans. Emphasis is on basic web page design techniques. 
Topics include standards for representing common media 
formats, compression algorithms, file format translation tools, 
hardware requirements and standards, system constraints, 
Java, CGI scripts, and virtual reality. Assignments require build-
ing a portfolio of rich media content.
IMAT 670 Informatics Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: 30 credits of program coursework. A capstone 
study of emerging and current technologies, as well as some 
eternal verities in IT management, that integrates, and aug-
ments concepts previously studied. Topics vary and may 
include aligning IT with the strategic goals of the enterprise, 
leadership in IT, software psychology in the design of user inter-
faces, geographical information systems, building and manag-
ing internet communities, technology to ameliorate the digital 
divide, managing an enterprise’s IT portfolio, and the social 
impact of information policy decisions.
Information Assurance 
INFA 610 Foundations of Information Security  
and Assurance (3)
(To be taken as the first course in the program.) An overview 
of techniques for ensuring and managing information security. 
Topics include administrative and technical security controls to 
prevent, detect, respond to, and recover from cyber attacks; risk 
and vulnerability analysis to select security controls; security 
planning; security architecture; security evaluation and assess-
ment; and legal, ethical, and privacy aspects of information 
assurance. Discussion also covers information security fun-
damentals, such as cryptography, authentication, and access 
control techniques, and their use in network, operating system, 
database, and application layers. Emphasis is on security 
issues of current importance.
INFA 620 Network and Internet Security (3)
An introduction to the security concepts needed for the design, 
use, and implementation of secure voice and data communica-
tions networks, including the internet. A brief review of network-
ing technology and standards (including an introduction to 
internet communication protocols) is provided. Security subjects 
addressed include defense models, security policy develop-
ment, authentication and authorization controls, firewalls, packet 
filtering, virtual private networks (VPNs), and wireless network 
security. A project on network security in a hypothetical scenario 
based on inputs from government agencies and commercial 
organizations is assessed by a team of experts who are working 
in the field.
INFA 630 Intrusion Detection and Intrusion Prevention (3)
An exploration of the theory and implementation of intrusion 
detection and intrusion prevention. Topics include network-
based, host-based, and hybrid intrusion detection; intrusion 
prevention; attack pattern identification; deployment; response; 
surveillance; damage assessment; data forensics; data mining; 
attack tracing; system recovery; and continuity of operation. 
A project on intrusion detection and intrusion prevention in a 
hypothetical scenario based on input from government agen-
cies and commercial organizations is assessed by a team of 
experts who are working in the field.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
312
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
INFA 640 Cryptology and Data Protection (3)
An overview of the theory of encryption using symmetric and 
asymmetric keys, current protocols for exchanging secure data 
(including the Data Encryption Standard and the Advanced 
Encryption Standard), and secure communication techniques.  
A review of the historical development of cryptographic 
methods and cryptanalysis tools is provided. Public Key Infra-
structure and the use of digital signatures and certificates for 
protecting and validating data are examined. Strategies for the 
physical protection of information assets are explored.
INFA 650 Computer Forensics (3)
An introduction to the fundamental concepts behind the collec-
tion and analysis of the digital evidence left behind in a digital 
crime scene. Topics include the identification, preservation, 
collection, examination, analysis, and presentation of evidence 
for prosecution purposes. Discussion also covers the laws and 
ethics related to computer forensics and challenges in com-
puter forensics. Network forensics is briefly explored. A project 
on computer forensics or network forensics in a hypothetical 
scenario based on input from government agencies and com-
mercial organizations is assessed by a team of experts who  
are working in the field.
INFA 660 The Law, Regulation and Ethics  
of Information Assurance (3)
An overview of the legal, regulatory, and ethical issues related to 
cyberspace. Emphasis is on developing skills in spotting ethical 
and legal issues and navigating through the complex and chang-
ing legal and regulatory environment as it applies to behavior in 
cyberspace. Various resources and materials related to the ethi-
cal and legal operation of modern computer systems, applica-
tions, and networks are presented.
INFA 670 Information Assurance Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: INFA 610, INFA 620, INFA 630, INFA 640, INFA 
650, and INFA 660 (3 credits may be taken concurrently). A 
study of information assurance that integrates and applies 
concepts previously studied. Best practices and appropriate 
technologies to design, implement, manage, evaluate, and fur-
ther improve information security are explored. Emerging trends 
are analyzed to understand their potential effect on information 
security and assurance.
Intelligence Management 
INMS 600 Managing Intelligence Activities (3)
An introduction to management issues associated with the 
national intelligence community and activities in national and 
homeland security, law enforcement, and the private sector. 
Intelligence is evaluated from the perspectives of its consum-
ers in government and business. Topics include the historical 
issues that led to extensive oversight of intelligence agencies 
and laws restricting their activities. Discussion also covers 
recent changes in national intelligence and current issues, such 
as the debate over security versus civil liberties and how to 
protect America from foreign espionage and exploitation.
INMS 610 Intelligence Collection: Sources  
and Challenges (3)
A study of the management challenges related to collecting 
all-source intelligence for national security, counterterrorism, and 
business purposes through case-study analysis and planning 
exercises. The fundamentals of multisource intelligence—human 
source intelligence; open source intelligence; signals intelligence; 
geospatial intelligence; technical intelligence; cyber intelligence 
and persistent intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
(ISR) collection—are assessed. Discussion covers innova-
tive collection methods, access to denied environments, agile 
architectures, the impact of artificial intelligence and machine 
learning, sensor data fusion, and the integration of multisource 
intelligence. Topics include how requirements drive collection 
efforts, the relationship between collection and analysis, and the 
costs associated with collection of intelligence.
INMS 620 Intelligence Analysis: Consumers, Uses,  
and Issues (3)
Prerequisites: INMS 600 and INMS 610. An examination of the 
intelligence requirements of various clients in government and 
the private sector. The various purposes of analysis, such as 
warning, policy planning, research and development, systems or 
product planning, support for law enforcement and correctional 
agencies, support for operational activities, and investment, are 
examined. Discussion covers managing analytical methodolo-
gies and techniques and dissent in analyses, adapting cutting-
edge machine learning techniques, and understanding the 
reasons for failures. Case studies illustrate issues in analysis 
management and critical thinking. The conflict between intelli-
gence analysts and decision makers at national and local levels 
is explored.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
313
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
INMS 630 Counterintelligence (3)
An examination of the vulnerabilities of the United States,  
allied countries, and private businesses to espionage and  
how counterintelligence can reduce the threat. Discussion 
covers case studies of espionage against America, including 
insider threats, cyber and economic espionage against U.S. 
technology and business. Topics include the roles, missions, 
and espionage activities of foreign intelligence services. Major 
threat groups are assessed, and management issues related 
to countering these threats are evaluated. U.S. policy issues 
and the management challenges of interagency cooperation 
among local, state, and international sources and public/private 
partnerships are explored.
INMS 640 Intelligence-Led Enforcement (3)
An evaluation of management approaches and assessment of 
issues associated with intelligence support for crime preven-
tion and law and regulation enforcement. Topics include the 
issue of public-private cooperation, domestic counterterrorism, 
drug law enforcement, and actions to counter financial crimes. 
Interagency cooperation and intelligence sharing with state, 
local, and tribal agencies and laws and executive orders related 
to intelligence promulgated since 9/11 are examined. The roles 
of intelligence in fighting transnational crime and cybercrime 
is also covered in this course. Assignments include case-study 
analysis and original research.
INMS 650 Intelligence Management and Oversight (3)
Prerequisites: INMS 600 and INMS 610. An examination of the 
relationships among intelligence organizations at federal, state, 
and local levels, as well as with private corporations. Strate-
gies for the management and control of intelligence activities, 
including establishing policies, setting budgets, and conducting 
reviews, are examined. Discussion covers how intelligence over-
sight (including the roles and responsibilities of the executive, 
legislative, and judicial branches of government) works and how 
business intelligence activities are managed and overseen in 
the private sector.
INMS 660 Leadership Seminar (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of 30 credits of program coursework, 
including all core and specialization courses (except MGMT 670). 
An analysis and assessment of leadership challenges within intel-
ligence environments. Key leadership and management principles 
in dealing with intelligence situations, scenarios, and issues are 
applied to real-world intelligence situations, such as handling 
insider threats; augmenting intelligence collection; planning 
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) operations; 
establishing and expanding foreign intelligence partnerships;  
prioritizing budgets; responding to intelligence oversight inquiries; 
infusing advanced technologies; coordinating intelligence and 
cyber operations; or assessing counterintelligence, counter- 
terrorism, and nation-state security threats.
Information Systems  
and Services 
ISAS 600 Information Systems for Managers (3)
(Designed for managers without a technical background in  
computers and information systems.) Prerequisite: Basic micro-
computer skills. An investigation of different types of hardware 
and software and their application in organizations from a 
systems perspective. Case studies are used to reveal technical 
and organizational issues, along with operational considerations. 
Emphasis is on determining managers’ needs for information 
and procuring and using appropriate computer systems.
ISAS 610 Information Systems Management  
and Integration (3)
A study of the life cycle of the information system, from incep-
tion, through systems development and integration, to system 
operation and maintenance. Emphasis is on the integration of 
information systems with management systems of an organiza-
tion. Major phases, procedures, policies, and techniques in the 
information system life cycle are discussed in detail.
ISAS 620 Information Systems Sourcing Management (3)
A study of how best to make and implement appropriate deci-
sions in providing information systems to an organization, as 
well as how to manage the outcomes of such decisions. Focus 
is on the frameworks, tools, and techniques for making sourcing 
decisions. Topics include “make or buy” decisions, the use of 
off-the-shelf package software (including enterprise resource 
planning software), various models of outsourcing, and the 
outsourcing of entire business processes. The implications 
of whether to source domestically or offshore are evaluated. 
Discussion also covers contemporary issues related to cloud 
computing and the options it offers.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
314
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
ISAS 630 Systems Analysis and Design (3)
A study of current techniques and practices in requirements 
specification, software application selection, project manage-
ment, and analysis and design of information system appli-
cations. Emphasis is on a management perspective in the 
specification of the information system’s logical and physical 
analysis and design.
ISAS 640 Decision Support Systems  
and Expert Systems (3)
An investigation of computer applications for management  
support. The technologies of decision support systems and 
expert systems and the organizational factors leading to the 
success or failure of such systems are introduced. Topics also 
include group decision support systems, integration and imple-
mentation issues, and related advanced technologies such as 
neural networks.
ISAS 650 Information Technology, the CIO,  
and Organizational Transformation (3)
An examination of how information technology can affect the 
strategic direction of an organization, how IT enables new ways 
of operating, and how the chief information officer can serve as 
a trusted member of the organization’s top management team 
to help it exploit information technology effectively.
Information Technology 
ITEC 610 Information Technology Foundations (3)
A fundamental study of technology and its applications, as well 
as the economic and social issues they have raised. Topics 
include computers, peripherals, databases, and networks; oper-
ations (of business, government, and other enterprises), deci-
sion support systems, and acquisition of information technol-
ogy resources; and information security, productivity, equitable 
access by users, intellectual property rights, and global reach. 
Discussion also covers current and future developments in the 
field and their implications.
ITEC 625 Computer Systems Architecture (3)
An introduction to the evolution of computer systems design 
and hardware and software architectures. Focus is on computer 
organization (classical and advanced architectures), operating 
systems, and applications development. Emerging develop-
ments in computer systems architecture are also examined.
ITEC 626 Information Systems Infrastructure (3)
An introduction to information systems infrastructure. Focus 
is on data communications and networks. Discussion covers 
layered network architectures and communication hardware. 
Emerging technologies such as social media, mobile comput-
ing, cloud computing, big data, and the Internet of Things are  
also examined.
ITEC 630 Information Systems Analysis, Modeling,  
and Design (3)
A study of systems analysis and design, using selected engi-
neering and management science techniques and practices. 
Topics include requirements determination, modeling, decision-
making, and proposal development. The System Develop-
ment Life Cycle Model, including system implementation and 
postimplementation activities, is examined. Emphasis is on the 
specification of the information system’s logical and physical 
analysis and design from a management perspective. Research 
and project assignments related to information systems analy-
sis, design, implementation, and/or project planning and control, 
require individual and group work.
ITEC 640 Information Technology Project Management (3)
An examination of the fundamental principles and practice of 
managing programs and projects in an information process-
ing and high-tech environment. The dynamic nature of IT and 
the effect of life cycles are explored. The fundamental building 
blocks of high-tech management styles (including project plan-
ning, organizational structure, team building, and effective con-
trol mechanisms) are addressed. Discussion covers the effect 
of product and project life cycles in delivering a successful IT 
project, considering the obsolescence factors in procurement/
stakeholder contracts. The goal is to gain a solid foundation to 
successfully manage each phase of the project life cycle, work 
within organizational and cost constraints, set goals linked 
directly to stakeholder needs, and utilize proven management 
tools to execute a dynamic project on time and within budget. 
Emphasis is on how to apply the essential concepts, processes, 
and techniques in the management of large-scale governmen-
tal or commercial programs. Topics also include the need for 
global vision, strong planning techniques, appropriate training 
before introducing any IT product into the market, and discipline 
in executing tasks.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
315
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Instructional Technology 
INST 600 Technology Integration  
in the Contemporary Classroom (3)
An introductory study of current trends in educational technol-
ogy. The objective is to use International Society for Technol-
ogy in Education (ISTE) standards to explore current trends 
in educational technology, study learning theory, and apply 
instructional technology integration models to the design of 
standards-based lesson plans. Discussion covers technology-
infused lesson plans and digital tools and resources. Activities 
include development of a professional portfolio, and creation of 
a professional growth plan. Students may receive credit for only 
one of the following courses: EDTC 600 or INST 600.
INST 605 Designing Learner-Centered Environments (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: INST 600. A study of contemporary 
learning models that facilitate authentic, technology-rich learn-
ing experiences to promote student autonomy. The objective 
is to use learning science to investigate contemporary learning 
models and frameworks in depth. Topics include the design of 
lessons and learning activities that facilitate collaboration, criti-
cal thinking, creativity, and communication and the design of 
flexible, accessible, active learning spaces.
INST 610 Digital Identity and Critical Media Analysis (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: INST 605. A comprehensive exami-
nation of the responsibility that educators have to protect learn-
ers from cyber threats. The objective is to apply best practices 
for protecting student privacy; promoting safe, ethical, and 
legal behavior online; and teaching critical analysis and design 
of media. Activities include designing instructional materials 
to support students, parents, and other educators in making 
informed decisions to safeguard personal privacy and digital 
identity and to apply critical media analysis in the development 
of online content. Students may receive credit for only one of 
the following courses: EDTC 605 or INST 610.
INST 615 Learning Analytics and Adaptation (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: INST 610. An exploration of learning 
analytics. The objective is to better target students’ individual 
learning needs through deeper insight into their performance. 
Topics include data literacy, differentiation, ADA compliance, 
and personalized learning, as well as designing a rich variety of 
formative and summative assessments, using student data, and 
learning analytics to inform the design of technology-enhanced 
lessons, and selecting assistive technologies. Students may 
receive credit for only one of the following courses: EDTC 615  
or INST 615.
INST 620 Transforming Education Online (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: INST 615. An exploration of online 
learning. The objective is to apply instructional design theories, 
models, and frameworks to develop learning experiences for 
digital platforms. Topics include developing a needs assess-
ment, writing learning objectives, consulting digital rights and 
ADA guidelines in the development of interactive instructional 
materials and OERs, creating supporting materials and assess-
ments, and evaluating the success of design projects. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses: EDTC 
610 or INST 620.
INST 625 Leading Change and Innovation  
in Educational Environments (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: INST 620. A comprehensive study of 
change management. The objective is to lead change efforts by 
investigating issues that affect technology adoption in schools, 
exploring notable change management theories, and developing 
strategies to mitigate fear and resistance. Topics include devel-
oping a change management plan for school or district improve-
ment that is informed by mission, vision, goals, and culture and 
establishing oneself as a thought leader in the field by creating 
a professional online presence.
INST 630 Coaching for Instructional Innovation (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: INST 625. A detailed exploration of 
coaching about instructional technology. The objective is to 
demonstrate coaching skills, such as facilitating learning and 
growth, encouraging risk taking, facilitating deep reflection, 
and providing meaningful feedback. Topics include relationship 
building with other educators to create a supportive and produc-
tive culture conducive to the coaching process.
INST 640 Designing for Professional Development  
and Growth (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: INST 630. A comprehensive study of 
effective professional development planning efforts that support 
the development and growth of teachers across the entire pro-
fessional continuum. The objective is to apply research-based 
adult learning principles to support the specific learning, cultural, 
and social-emotional needs of educators to increase their ability 
to effectively integrate technology in the classroom. Topics 
include emerging trends, best practices, and contemporary pro-
fessional development models. Students may receive credit for 
only one of the following courses: EDTC 640 or INST 640.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
316
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
INST 645 Strategic Technology Planning (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: INST 640. An investigation of  
strategic planning efforts in modern school districts. The  
objective is to engage in a strategic planning process to imple-
ment new technology by collaborating with stakeholders to 
develop a shared vision, writing goals and objectives, creating 
an action plan with communication strategies and criteria for 
evaluation, and mobilizing resources. Topics include developing 
a strategic plan for a technology integration initiative, develop-
ing funding proposals, and writing professional recommenda-
tions for new digital resources and technology tools. Students 
may receive credit for only one of the following courses:  
EDTC 630 or INST 645.
INST 650 Integrative Capstone I (3)
Prerequisite or corequisite: INST 645. A thorough review of the 
instructional technology concepts and skills acquired through 
previous coursework. The objective is to work collaboratively 
with a teacher or group of teachers to identify instructional chal-
lenges, select a technology-based solution, set goals, engage in 
collaborative learning, provide coaching and feedback, collect 
data, and reflect on success. Activities include identifying a 
teacher or group of teachers to work with, analyzing available 
data, identifying an instructional challenge, and developing a 
coaching plan.
INST 670 Integrative Capstone II (3)
Prerequisite: INST 650. Continued review of the instructional 
technology concepts and skills acquired through previous 
coursework. The objective is to work collaboratively with a 
teacher or group of teachers to identify instructional challenges, 
select a technology-based solution, set goals, engage in col-
laborative learning, provide coaching and feedback, collect data, 
and reflect on your success. Activities include implementing the 
coaching plan, collecting data, and analyzing it.
Learning Design  
and Technology 
LDT 610 Learning Design and Digital Pedagogy (6)
Prerequisite: DCL 600M. Gain the foundational knowledge, skills, 
and dispositions needed in the field of learning design. Explore 
the history of online learning and design; current learning 
design models; foundational theories and principles of distance 
learning, adult learning, collaborative and social learning, and 
computer-mediated learning; and technology tools and applica-
tions to support online interactions.
LDT 620 Learning Design, Media, and Emerging 
Technologies (6)
Prerequisite: LDT 610. Develop skills in the design, develop-
ment, and integration of digital media to enhance the learning 
experience. Investigate how media, emerging and mobile tools, 
and online applications impact technology-mediated learning 
environments. Explore media and visual literacy, graphic design 
for online and mobile environments, the use and design of open 
educational resources, emerging technologies, and trends in 
technology such as mobile learning environments, gaming, and 
augmented reality.
LDT 630 Learning Design and Data Analytics (6)
Prerequisite: LDT 620. Investigate advanced learning design 
concepts and apply data analytics to assess the impact of 
design and technology on learning. Implement a systems think-
ing approach and digital tools to evaluate and support online 
learners and learning programs. Explore the assessment of 
online learning and interactions, data analytic tools and tech-
niques, ways to support user experiences, human/computer 
interface design, and data visualization.
LDT 640 Advanced Practicum in Learning Design (6)
Prerequisite: LDT 630. Examine and evaluate leadership and 
change models to advance learning design projects. Identify 
and research legal issues associated with online teaching and 
learning. Examine leadership and project management tech-
niques associated with learning design projects, evaluate learn-
ing management systems, and identify a project and develop a 
learning design seminar proposal.
LDT 670 Learning Design Seminar (6)
Prerequisite: LDT 640. Assume the role of an instructional 
designer and apply learning design knowledge, skills, and 
dispositions to create and assess an authentic online learning 
program. Complete the design, implementation, and analysis of 
a learning design project. Develop a professional portfolio and 
present the project and reflective analysis online.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
317
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
Management 
MGMT 610 Organizational Theory (3)
An overview of the fundamental concepts of organizational 
theory and design in the context of organizational efficiency 
and managerial roles. The objective is to analyze organizational 
theory concepts and the history of management thought and its 
relevance for managers today, evaluate how organizational struc-
ture and culture impact decision-making and workflow, analyze 
how systems thinking and external and internal factors affect 
contemporary organizational structure, and use organizational  
theory concepts to design strategic plans to meet organizational 
needs. Discussion covers essential concepts in organizational 
theory and design, including measures of effectiveness, organi-
zational life cycles, options for organizational structure, the learn-
ing organization, effective decision-making, and the manager’s 
role in developing and maintaining the organizational structure. 
Topics include the appropriateness of organizational structures 
and design to meet the needs of the organization, organizational 
ethics and social responsibility, global issues, organizational 
effectiveness, and the challenges of managing in today’s complex 
and rapidly changing environment.
MGMT 615 Organizational Behavior (3)
A study of organizational culture and the management of indi-
vidual and team behaviors that contribute to an organization’s 
sustainability. The objective is to analyze the role of manage-
ment in creating and sustaining an organizational culture that 
promotes the organization’s purpose and vision and to apply the 
communication, management, and relationship-building skills 
crucial to the success of the manager within the workplace. 
Focus is on the human skills that are relevant to the success of 
the manager within the workplace. Topics include the impact 
that individual characteristics, team dynamics, organizational 
communication, and culture have on employee performance 
and commitment.
MGMT 630 Organizational Theory and Behavior (6)
(Not open to students who have completed MGMT 610 or 
MGMT 615.) An overview of the fundamental concepts of orga-
nizational theory and behavior. The goal is to evaluate manage-
ment theories relevant to a manager’s role, design organiza-
tional structure to maximize decision-making, and recognize the 
significance of systems thinking to the contemporary organiza-
tion. Topics include the human skills that are relevant to the 
success of the manager within the workplace. Discussion cov-
ers the impact that individual characteristics, team dynamics, 
communication, and organizational culture have on developing 
effective and committed employee performance. Students who 
receive credit for MGMT 630 may not receive credit for MGMT 
610 or MGMT 615.
MGMT 640 Financial Decision-Making for Managers (3)
An exploration of contemporary managerial practices related to 
financial decision-making in business, government, and not-for-
profit organizations. Emphasis is on fundamental concepts of 
financial accounting and economics, including opportunity cost, 
the time value of money, and financial analysis. The objective is 
to apply financial and nonfinancial information to a wide range 
of management decisions, from product pricing and budget-
ing to project analysis and performance measurement. Topics 
include decision-making tools such as break-even analysis, 
activity-based costing procedures, and discounted cash flow 
techniques. Activities require extensive use of Microsoft Excel.
MGMT 650 Statistics for Managerial Decision-Making (3)
Prerequisite: Knowledge of the fundamentals of statistical meth-
ods, techniques, and tools. An examination of how managers 
organize, analyze, and interpret data for decision-making. Focus 
is on developing skills in using statistical tools to make effective 
business decisions in all areas of public- and private-sector 
decision-making, including accounting, finance, marketing, pro-
duction management, and human resource management. Topics 
include collecting data; describing, sampling, and presenting 
data; probability; statistical inference; regression analysis; fore-
casting; and risk analysis. Microsoft Excel is used extensively 
for organizing, analyzing, and presenting data.
MGMT 670 Strategic Management Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: Completion of 24 credits of program coursework, 
including all core courses. A capstone investigation of how 
strategy interacts with and guides an organization within its 
internal and external environments. Focus is on corporate- and 
business unit–level strategy, strategy development, strategy 
implementation, and the overall strategic management process. 
Topics include organizational mission, vision, goal setting, 
environmental assessment, and strategic decision-making. 
Techniques such as industry analysis, competitive analysis, and 
portfolio analysis are presented. Discussion covers strategic 
implementation as it relates to organizational structure, policy, 
leadership, and evaluation issues. The ability to think strate-
gically and to weigh things from the perspective of the total 
enterprise operating in an increasingly global market environ-
ment is emphasized. Case analyses and text material are used 
to integrate knowledge and skills gained through previous study.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
318
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
MRKT 605 International Marketing Management (3)
An overview of the fundamentals of marketing and marketing 
management, presented in the context of competitive global 
environments and diverse national economies. Topics include 
demand analysis, product development, product pricing, market-
ing organization, foreign representation and distribution systems, 
promotion, advertising, and sales and service. Review also covers 
regulatory issues as they relate to international marketing.
MRKT 606 Digital and Direct Marketing (3)
Prerequisite: MGMT 650. A study of various methods and tech-
niques used in digital and direct marketing. Focus is on assess-
ing customer needs to better use social and digital techniques 
and other tools in the context of a comprehensive digital market-
ing strategy. Discussion covers digital analytics concepts and 
their role in developing optimized digital insight-driven marketing 
strategies and traditional direct marketing methods to promote 
customer engagement and the deployment of multiple market-
ing channels to enhance customer relationships. Topics include 
search engine marketing, digital content marketing, mobile 
marketing, database marketing, direct mail, telemarketing, and 
email marketing.
MRKT 620 Marketing Management, Legal,  
and Ethical Issues (6)
An introduction to marketing management techniques and the 
legal and ethical environment of marketing. Discussion cov-
ers planning, decision-making, marketing goals, and metrics. 
Emphasis is on achieving an organization’s marketing objectives 
by creating value for individual consumers and organizational 
customers. Topics include consumer behavior, competitive 
strategies, marketing communications (e.g., advertising, digital 
marketing), marketing research, pricing, and distribution. Legal 
and ethical topics include consumer privacy, ethical responsibili-
ties, fair advertising, free speech, global marketing, intellectual 
property, and regulatory issues. Students who receive credit for 
MRKT 620 may not receive credit for MRKT 600 or MRKT 601
Marketing 
MRKT 600 Marketing Management (3)
An introduction to marketing management techniques. Empha-
sis is on achieving an organization’s marketing objectives by 
creating value for individual consumers and organizational cus-
tomers. Discussion covers planning, decision-making, marketing 
goals, and metrics. Topics also include consumer behavior, com-
petitive strategies, marketing communications (e.g., advertising, 
digital marketing), marketing research, pricing, and distribution.
MRKT 601 Legal and Ethical Issues in Marketing (3)
An overview of the legal and ethical environment of marketing. 
Topics include consumer privacy, ethical responsibilities, fair 
advertising, free speech, global marketing, intellectual property, 
and regulatory issues.
MRKT 602 Consumer Behavior (3)
A study of the cognitive and behavioral bases underlying con-
sumers’ buying preferences and decision processes, intended 
for managers and administrators who have to evaluate the effi-
cacy of the firm’s marketing plan. Emphasis is on the role of the 
communications strategy (for example, advertising, promotion, 
public relations) in achieving the overall marketing objectives.
MRKT 603 Brand Management (3)
A presentation of the concepts and techniques for creating and 
selecting marketing strategies for an organizational unit that 
survives on its ability to provide products and services to other 
organizations. Discussion covers trends toward a “marketing 
culture” in both public and private institutions and the implica-
tions that this change has for all managers and administrators. 
Emphasis is on the role of brand equity in achieving a sustain-
able competitive advantage.
MRKT 604 Marketing Research and Analytics (3)
Prerequisite: MGMT 650. A study of marketing research meth-
ods. Focus is on identifying marketing problems and oppor-
tunities and developing data-based approaches to generate, 
refine, and evaluate marketing actions. Topics include design-
ing market research strategies, understanding customer data 
analysis techniques and their application to real-world market-
ing problems, and evaluating the managerial implications of 
analytical results.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
319
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
NPMN 640 Marketing, Development, and Public Relations 
in Nonprofit Organizations and Associations (3)
A study of the principles and practices required to develop and 
promote the products, services, positions, and image of non-
profit organizations. Focus is on fundraising and membership 
recruitment issues. Topics include the design of a marketing 
strategy and marketing mix, pricing issues, alternative revenue-
generating mechanisms, and customer service. Discussion also 
explores use of the media; advertising and promotion methods; 
and relationships with business, government, and the commu-
nity. The integration of sponsors, members, and chapters in the 
total marketing effort is examined.
NPMN 650 Fundamentals of Association Management (3)
A study of the unique and important niche of associations 
within the nonprofit sector. Analysis covers the history of 
associations, political groups, trade lobbying groups, and foun-
dations in relation to their varying missions, internal capacity, 
shifting environments, and legal status. Associations also are 
assessed in terms of their wider environment, including the 
extent of their labor force and command of capital resources. 
Discussion covers the wider influence of associations on U.S. 
economy and policy.
NPMN 655 Process and Outcome Evaluation  
for Nonprofit Organizations (3)
An examination of the growing importance of process and 
outcome evaluation to nonprofit organizations in supporting 
their missions. Various quantitative and qualitative evaluation 
strategies, as well as quality and process-improvement method-
ologies, are explored. Topics include important evaluation con-
cepts such as validity and reliability of various data collection 
tools, various approaches to sampling, and precision of results.
NPMN 660 Strategic Management in Nonprofit 
Organizations and Associations (3)
A study of the integration and application of strategic manage-
ment principles, concepts, and practices in nonprofit organiza-
tions. Topics include the development of mission statements, 
goal-setting concepts, and strategy formulation and implemen-
tation approaches. Assignments focus on designing organiza-
tional plans and strategies relevant to the specific needs  
of organizations.
Nonprofit Management 
NPMN 600 Nonprofit and Association Organizations  
and Issues (3)
A presentation of a framework outlining the roles and functions 
of the principal types of nonprofit organizations. Characteristics 
that distinguish nonprofit organizations from their counterparts 
in the private and public sectors are introduced. The challenges, 
opportunities, and common issues facing managers of nonprofit 
organizations are explored. These issues include administra-
tive cost control, preserving the organization’s legal status and 
revenue base, staffing and organizing in response to client needs, 
and ethical considerations. Specific laws, regulations, policies, 
and court rulings that affect the nonprofit sector are examined.
NPMN 610 Nonprofit and Association Law  
and Governance (3)
A study of current ideas and approaches related to nonprofit 
law, governance, and mission. Discussion covers distinctions 
between nonprofit, educational, charitable, social action, mem-
bership, cultural, scientific, environmental, and trade associa-
tions as they relate to incorporation, legal standing, tax-exempt 
status, and governance. Topics include nonprofit governance 
and trustee issues, as well as lobbying and advocacy, nonprofit 
liability, personnel, and unrelated business income tax. Special 
attention is paid to the relationship of governance and ethics in 
nonprofit management.
NPMN 620 Nonprofit and Association Financial 
Management (3)
A detailed study of theories and practices of nonprofit finan-
cial management and decision-making, including budgeting, 
reporting requirements, nonprofit accounting, and financial 
standards. Focus is on the role of financial management in 
maintaining the fiscal health and legal status of the nonprofit 
organization. Topics include budgeting, fund accounting, cash 
flow analysis, expenditure control, long-range financial plan-
ning, audits, and grant and contract management. Discussion 
also covers compliance with nonprofit accounting and financial 
management principles in reference to maintaining public 
access and ethical standards.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
320
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
PMAN 637 Project Risk Management (3)
Prerequisite: PMAN 635. An in-depth analysis of risk manage-
ment methods and cases and project management risk monitor-
ing from strategic, applied perspectives. State-of-the-art tools 
and techniques for identifying, ranking, and monitoring risks in 
the project management environment are examined and utilized. 
Both qualitative and quantitative risk analyses are conducted, 
and strategies for proactive risk mitigation are developed. 
Focus is on how a comprehensive risk management approach 
can enable a project team to proactively manage issues that 
adversely impact the successful scope, scheduling, control, and 
completion of a project.
PMAN 638 Project Communications Management (3)
Prerequisite: PMAN 634. An overview of conflict resolution pro-
cesses and methods and the skills needed to manage the human 
elements within project management—a task as challenging as 
managing the technical aspects. Topics include critical commu-
nication and conflict resolution issues faced by project workers 
in today’s global corporate environment. Innovative approaches 
to successfully negotiating and resolving conflicts among team 
members, colleagues, managers, and stakeholders are introduced 
and practiced. Proven techniques to make conflict a constructive 
rather than a destructive experience are analyzed. Emphasis is on 
case study analysis, effective communication behaviors, negotia-
tion skills, and virtual team processes to successfully lead both 
domestic and global projects.
PMAN 639 Project Quality Management (3)
Prerequisite: PMAN 634. An applied study of the quality manage-
ment policies, processes, and procedures required to ensure that 
projects satisfy the objectives for which they were undertaken. 
Process improvement and quality planning, assurance, and 
control are emphasized, with a focus on effectively managing 
customer satisfaction, promoting prevention over inspection, and 
facilitating continuous improvement. Activities associated with 
determining quality objectives, policies, and responsibilities are 
evaluated and implemented in the context of quality manage-
ment principles, practices, and standards. Contemporary project 
quality management processes, tools, and applications are spot-
lighted and appraised for potential application to a project, with 
particular emphasis on the most widely used high-flier tools and 
techniques, such as benchmarking, cost of quality analysis, trend 
charts, histograms, control charts, cause and effect diagrams, 
Pareto charts, and Six Sigma. The need to mold the quality 
management approach to resonate with organizational priorities, 
objectives, and challenges is continually underscored.
Project Management 
PMAN 634 Foundations of Project Management (3)
An overview of the theory and practice of managing projects in 
any organization or industry using traditional, agile, and hybrid 
methodologies. All three skill sets of the Project Management 
Institute Talent Triangle—technical project management, leader-
ship, and strategic and business management—are addressed 
and provide a foundational project management knowledge 
and skill base that is highly relevant to workplace project chal-
lenges. Emphasis is on blending hard and soft skills to realize 
superior project outcomes. Skills associated with harnessing 
diversity; building, leading, and motivating project teams; com-
munications; conflict management; and emotional intelligence 
are intertwined with tools and techniques drawn from all ten of 
the project management knowledge areas—integration, scope, 
schedule, cost, quality, resource, communication, risk, procure-
ment, and stakeholder—with emphasis on integration manage-
ment and scope management. These skills and techniques are 
contextualized to predictive (traditional) and adaptive (agile) 
life cycles and to the initiation, planning, executing, monitoring/
control, and closure of a project. Emphasis is on the need to 
constantly align projects with value creation using practices 
and approaches that are tailored to mission, vision, and strategy 
of an organization; to the needs and priorities of stakeholders; 
and to organizational culture and mores.
PMAN 635 Project Schedule, Cost,  
and Resource Management (3)
Prerequisite: PMAN 634. An in-depth coverage of the logical 
and conceptual progression of a project from scope to sched-
ule and budget, developed in the context of traditional project 
management and then adapted to agile and hybrid approaches. 
Aspects of resource management that relate to schedule and 
cost are also addressed. Emphasis is on cultivating practical 
and workplace-relevant skills, tools, and techniques essential for 
effectively estimating, modeling, and managing schedule and 
budget and for addressing the associated uncertainties, impera-
tives, and challenges encountered in real-life projects. Project 
management software is used to develop actionable reports and 
dashboards that provide a realistic and well-informed depiction 
of the schedule and budget, so that stakeholders can effectively 
engage with and support the project, make informed decisions, 
and assist in narrowing the gap between plan and actual perfor-
mance. Applications extend learning from projects to programs 
and portfolios and develop the leadership skills and insights 
required to ensure their alignment with organizational mission, 
strategy, and goals.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
321
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
SWEN 645 Software Requirements (3)
An examination of major models of software requirements and 
specifications, existing software standards and practices, and 
formal methods of software development. Topics include writing 
system and software requirements, formal specification analysis, 
formal description reasoning, models of “standard” paradigms, 
and translations of such models into formal notations.
SWEN 646 Software Design and Implementation (3)
An exploration of modern software development techniques, 
tools, and technologies for building large, complex systems. 
Topics include software development processes and the role of 
design in those processes. Discussion also covers major design 
methods, available computer-aided software engineering (CASE) 
tools, the proper application of design methods, and tech-
niques for estimating the magnitude of the development effort. 
Object-oriented programming is presented. Focus is on building 
software products using these technologies.
SWEN 647 Software Verification and Validation (3)
A study of methods for evaluating software for correctness, 
efficiency, performance, and reliability. Skills covered include pro-
gram proving, code inspection, unit-level testing, and system-level 
analysis. The difficulty and cost of some types of analysis and 
the need for automation of tedious tasks are examined. Empha-
sis is on problem-solving skills, especially in analyzing code.
SWEN 651 Usability Engineering (3)
A study of the theory and practice of designing user interfaces 
for interactive systems. Topics include the principles of usability 
engineering and basic rules for usable design. User interfaces 
are evaluated using techniques such as contextual inquiry, task 
analysis, and usability testing. Discussion also covers when 
these techniques are most appropriate.
SWEN 656 Advanced Software Design  
and Implementation (3)
Prerequisite: SWEN 646. An exploration of software design and 
implementation for reducing complexity of systems. Topics 
include software design patterns, object-oriented programming, 
and aspect-oriented programming design. Focus is on building 
software products using these technologies.
SWEN 661 User Interface Implementation (3)
Prerequisite: SWEN 651. An examination of all types of user 
interfaces. Topics include developing user interfaces using 
mobile, desktop, and web technologies. Focus is on building 
user interfaces using these technologies.
PMAN 641 Project Procurement Management (3)
Prerequisite: PMAN 634. An examination of the tools needed for 
project procurement management. Focus is on determining what 
needs to be purchased or acquired and determining when and 
how to acquire it. Topics include planning the contracting efforts 
(documenting products and services and identifying potential 
sellers); requesting sellers’ responses (obtaining information, 
quotes bids, offers, or proposals); selecting the seller (receiving 
and reviewing offers, selecting among those potential offers, and 
negotiating a contract); administering contracts (managing the 
relationship between buyers and sellers, including documentation, 
corrective actions, and contract changes); and closing contracts 
(completing the contract and settling all open issues).
PMAN 650 Financial and Strategic Management  
of Projects (3)
Prerequisites: PMAN 634 and PMAN 635. An investigation of 
financial and strategic decision-making in the management of 
projects. Topics include estimating project costs from work 
breakdown structure; formulating, monitoring, and controlling 
project budgets; monitoring, evaluating, and forecasting project 
costs, schedule, results, and performance using earned value 
management; and deriving project cash flows. Discussion also 
covers the impact of project scope, schedule, and changes; man-
agement reserves to cover risks and contingencies; top-down 
and bottom-up budgeting; investment project analysis; dis-
counted cash flow, internal rate of return, and net present value 
methodologies; cost of capital; and capital budgeting. Broader 
issues (such as links between project and corporate financial 
performance, business ethics, corporate social responsibility, 
project and organizational culture, information flow, and project 
sustainability) are also examined.
Software Engineering 
SWEN 603 Modern Software Methodologies (3)
An in-depth overview of widely used modern software develop-
ment methodologies. Historical software development methods 
are introduced. Topics include rapid application development 
and agile development, Scrum, Extreme Programming (XP), 
Unified Process, EVO (Evolutionary Project Management), lean 
software development, test-driven development, feature-driven 
development, Crystal solutions, Rational Unified Process, and 
other Unified Process methods. Discussion also covers advan-
tages and drawbacks of using each method.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
322
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
MSC 630 Communications Leadership  
and Management (6)
Prerequisite: MSC 620. Practice advanced strategic communi-
cations decision-making in both national and international con-
texts. Coordinate public relations efforts internally, particularly 
between marketing and advertising departments. Master funda-
mental financial accounting and budgeting concepts required 
for many communications campaigns in business, government, 
and the nonprofit sectors. Align communications campaigns 
with organizational objectives. Follow global strategic commu-
nications trends and legal and ethical issues.
MSC 640 Crisis Communications Management (6)
Prerequisite: MSC 630. Develop strategic responses, including 
crisis definition, issue management, and crisis communications 
management, to crisis situations. Apply crisis communication 
theory and implement risk communication and reputation and 
image restoration best practices. Utilize appropriate research 
methods to inform a crisis communications plan.
MSC 670 Capstone: Communications Campaigns (6)
Prerequisite: MSC 640. Assume the role of a corporate com-
munications director and create a communications plan to 
support an organizational strategy for an existing organization. 
Conduct research; develop a problem statement; and identify 
campaign goals and objectives, audience segments, and mes-
saging targeted to those segments. Create a communications 
strategy with tactics and timelines, evaluation plans, and a 
realistic budget.
Systems Engineering 
SYSE 610 Systems Engineering Overview (3)
An introduction to systems engineering using examples of man-
ufacturing, information, and mechanical systems that involve 
the integration of different technologies. Emphasis is on the 
role of the systems engineer. Systems thinking principles and 
complex systems and system-of-systems theory are reviewed. 
Discussion covers various approaches to system dynamics 
modeling. An overview of the system life cycle through con-
ception, design and development, integration and testing, and 
deployment and support is provided.
SYSE 620 Requirements Engineering (3)
An in-depth examination of the various techniques used in 
establishing and specifying system requirements, both physical 
and functional. Topics include system decomposition, require-
ments traceability, configuration management, and require-
ments validation. Several U.S. and international standards  
are examined as examples of requirements specification.
SWEN 670 Software Engineering Capstone (3)
Prerequisite: 30 credits of program coursework, including all 
core courses. A comprehensive examination of the tools, skills, 
and techniques of software engineering and their application. 
Completion of a major team project is designed to integrate 
knowledge and skills gained through previous study and provide 
experience of the constraints commonly experienced in industry 
(scheduling, vagueness of clients). Project requires forming 
teams (organization) and scheduling work to meet the deadlines 
imposed by the contract (syllabus).
Special Topics 
UCSP 615 Orientation to Graduate Studies at UMGC (0) 
(Required within the first 6 credits of graduate study for all new 
graduate students, except those in programs requiring CBR or 
DCL 600.) An overview of the skills needed for academic and 
professional success. Focus is on enhancing communication 
and critical thinking skills. Assignments provide familiarity with 
tools such as library and information resources. APA style and 
resources are also addressed.
Strategic 
Communications 
MSC 610 Foundations of Strategic Communications (6)
Prerequisite: DCL 600M. Acquire foundational skills in strategic 
communications, including effective writing targeted to different 
audiences and media; fundamental research; and the planning, 
execution, and assessment of a communications plan. Become 
familiar with the public relations, marketing, and advertising 
industries and their practices; theoretical and ethical founda-
tions; and the role of strategic communications in each.
MSC 620 Communications Techniques and Tactics (6)
Prerequisite: MSC 610. Develop internal and external com- 
munications strategies and select and produce appropriate  
communications tactics to execute them. Create internal com-
munications that focus on employee engagement, leadership, 
and change management. Exercise best practices in media  
relations and social media product development.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
323
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
SYSE 670 Systems Engineering Capstone (3)
Prerequisites: SYSE 640 and SYSE 650. A project-based 
capstone study of systems engineering designed to integrate 
knowledge and skills gained in previous study. Both individual 
projects and a group project focus on demonstrating the ability 
to construct a system design and develop a plan for a system’s 
development and support.
Transformational 
Leadership 
TLP 610 Repositioning Your Leadership Skills (6)
Prerequisite: DCL 600M. Master the ways in which leader-
ship takes place within organizations and the most effective 
leadership styles for directing individuals, projects, and groups 
to success. Demonstrate the differences between managing 
and leading, focusing on motivating and inspiring individuals 
in preparation for future challenges and opportunities. Explore 
the various roles that leaders take on in domestic and global 
markets and the ways leaders influence events that can drive 
success through individual and collaborative efforts. Create 
your own personal brand as you begin a journey to becoming  
a transformational leader.
TLP 620 Leading in the Organization (6)
Prerequisite: TLP 610. Analyze the dynamics involved in leading 
a workforce of multigenerational and diverse talent. Develop 
strategies for facilitating an inclusive work culture and maximiz-
ing the varied skill sets and experiences of employees. Weigh 
the impact of workforce change on organizations and consider 
the potential challenges that run counter to respectful, civil, and 
ethical work environments. Create retention and succession 
planning strategies and techniques for coaching and mentoring 
emerging leaders.
TLP 630 Leading with Strategy and  
Performance Measures (6)
Prerequisite: TLP 620. Gain the tools to assess the organiza-
tion’s bottom line and action steps for growth and sustainability. 
Apply strategic management theories and practice to measure 
and motivate organizational performance, identify trends, 
and direct the different stages of the organization’s life cycle. 
Become proficient using tools to review and interpret analytics, 
market research, and financial data that can drive short- and 
long-range strategic decisions and identify potential deficien-
cies that run counter to the organization’s mission and goals.
SYSE 625 Model-Based Systems Engineering (3)
Prerequisite: SYSE 610. An introduction to formal system model-
ing and simulation methods using software-based approaches, 
which are replacing more traditional document-based descrip-
tive modeling methods. Discussion covers the trend in industry 
toward standardized modeling techniques using software,  
especially SysML (Systems Modeling Language) computer  
packages, allowing greater consistency in system model repre-
sentations between technologies, across industries, and even 
across language barriers. Topics include ways that computers 
can represent system models in detail and provide complex 
system simulations with minimum effort using several differ-
ent system modeling and simulation software platforms. The 
objective is to be able to determine when and how model-based 
systems engineering (MBSE) approaches are useful, which tools 
to use, and which data to use as input to the MBSE tools and 
how to use the results from the tools in decision-making.
SYSE 630 System Design and Development (3)
Prerequisites: SYSE 610 and SYSE 620. A detailed exploration 
of the design and development phases of the system life cycle. 
Discussion covers several tools used for systems simulation 
and computer-aided design. Topics also include methods and 
policies for change control and the principles of quality assur-
ance as an underlying concept in systems design.
SYSE 640 System Integration and Test (3)
Prerequisites: SYSE 610 and SYSE 620. A review of various 
strategies used to integrate system components and verify 
satisfaction of requirements at both subsystem and overall 
system levels. The concept of formal verification, validation, 
and accreditation (VV&A) is discussed. Examples of automated 
software testing tools are also examined.
SYSE 650 Design Considerations (3)
Prerequisites: SYSE 610 and SYSE 620. An introduction to sys-
tem engineering subdisciplines that are critical in system design 
and deployment. Discussion covers reliability, availability, and 
maintainability (RAM) factors. Concepts in human factors engi-
neering, system safety, and quality assurance are also reviewed.
SYSE 660 Systems Engineering Management (3)
Prerequisites: SYSE 630 and SYSE 640. An examination of 
the role played by the systems engineer as liaison between 
technical specialists, business managers, and internal users or 
external customers. Discussion covers the traditional systems 
development life cycle, domestic and internal standards, and the 
evolving emphasis on agile methods and adaptive processes. 
Topics also include risk management and organizational consid-
erations in outsourcing.
COURSE INFORMATION  
GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
C A T A L O G  |  2 0 2 3 – 2 0 2 4                                 umgc.edu/programs
324
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX
TLP 640 Leading Through Change and Uncertainty (6)
Prerequisite: TLP 630. Apply change management techniques 
for leading and maintaining stability during unplanned, turbulent 
events within the organization. Analyze and implement stra-
tegic planning and decision-making approaches to diagnose 
the symptoms and predictors of organizational challenges 
and obstacles to change. Use change management models to 
assess organizational performance and process reengineer-
ing and to forecast outcomes and resistance to change at the 
individual, group, and organization levels.
TLP 670 Leadership Capstone (6)
Prerequisite: TLP 640. Lead a real-world consulting project.  
Apply the techniques of project management as you collabo- 
rate with a partnering organization to develop a strategic and 
financial plan to address an organizational issue. Use client- 
relationship management, organizational diagnosis models,  
and coaching and presentation skills to complete your consult-
ing project and showcase your solutions and plans to your 
partner organization.
